Causes, Risks Prevention Causes Risks Screening Prevention
Treatment Side Effects Overview of Treatment Chemotherapy Chemo Side Effects Radiation Immunotherapy Cutting-Edge Treatments Complementary Alternative Medicine
Living With Daily Life Diet Exercise Pain, Fatigue Mental Health
Appointment Prep Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Polycythemia Vera Myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDS) Myelofibrosis Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML)
This is one of the several kinds of oral (mouth) cancers. Like other cancers, it happens when cells divide out of control and form a growth or tumor.
There are two types. One is called oral tongue cancer because it affects the part you can stick out. The other happens at the base of your tongue, where it connects to your throat. This type, called oropharyngeal cancer,Â is often diagnosed after it has spread to the lymph nodes in your neck.
Tongue cancer is less common than many other types. Most people who get it are older adults. It s rare in children.
One of the first signs of tongue cancer is a white or red patch, lump, or sore on the side of your tongue that doesn t go away.
Changes in your voice, like sounding hoarse
Trouble swallowing or chewing or with moving your jaw or tongue
A feeling like something is caught in your throat
A lump in the back of your mouth, throat, or neck
If you have a sore on your tongue or in your mouth that doesn t get better in a couple of weeks, see your doctor.
If the problem is at the base of your tongue, you may not notice any symptoms. Your dentist may find signs of tongue cancer during a checkup, or your doctor might notice something during a regular exam.
The human papillomavirus (HPV) canÂ causeÂ cancers on the base of the tongue.Â HPVÂ also can infect your genital area and causeÂ cervical cancer , penile cancer, and anal cancer. HPV infection is the most common sexually transmitted infection. There are manyÂ types of HPV. The ones that raise your odds of gettingÂ cancerÂ are called high-risk HPVs.
Other things that may raise your chances of getting tongueÂ cancerÂ include:
Not taking care of yourÂ teethÂ and gums
Chewing betel, common in South and Southeast Asia
Your genes also may play a role in whether you re likely to get tongueÂ cancer.
Tongue cancer is more common in men and people assigned male at birth than in women and people assigned female at birth. You re also more likely to get the illness if you re 45 or older and have a weakened immune system.
Your doctor will examine your mouth and ask questions about your symptoms. Then, they may suggest testing to diagnose tongue cancer, including:
Imaging tests. These tests, such as X-rays, CT , MRI, and PET scans, capture detailed pictures of your mouth, including where the cancer is located and its size. You could also need a barium swallow, a type of X-ray where you drink a liquid called barium. It makes the signs of cancer more visible on X-rays.
Biopsy. Your doctor may also take a sample of tissue from your mouth to test (a biopsy ). They could use different techniques to get the sample, including:
Brush biopsy. In this method, doctors use a stiff brush to gather cells from your tongue, moving the brush in a circular motion.
Incisional biopsy. This is where a doctor makes a small elliptical-shaped cut on your tongue to remove tissue samples.
Endoscopy. During this test, your doctor will insert a thin tube fitted with a light and camera into your nose and down your throat, where they ll look for signs of cancer. An endoscopy can also show if cancer has spread to other areas of your throat.
Diagnosis also helps your doctor figure out the stage of your tongue cancer, meaning how large the tumor is and whether it has spread. Understanding your cancer stage also offers details about:
Doctors use different staging systems, but TNM is the one they use the most for cancer reporting. In this system:
T describes the size and scope of the main tumor called the primary tumor
N describes how many of your lymph nodes have cancer
M describes whether your cancer has spread to other parts of your body (metastasized)
The TNM system also uses a series of numbers after each letter to provide even more information about the cancer, like the size of the main tumor.
Your treatment will depend on where your tumor is and how big it is.
Surgery. During this operation, called a glossectomy, a surgeon takes out all or a portion of your tongue, depending on how large the cancer is. They ll also remove some healthy cells surrounding your tongue. If it looks like the cancer has spread to your lymph nodes, the surgeon could take out some of this tissue (called a neck dissection). After surgery, you may need physical therapy and rehab for speaking and swallowing problems.
Reconstructive surgery. Doctors use this type of surgery to restore parts of your face or mouth that need to be removed during a cancer operation. They ll take healthy bone or tissue from other parts of your body and use it to replace parts of the tongue, lip, face, and other areas.
Radiation therapy. This treatment directs strong energy beams from X-rays , protons, or other means at specific places on your body to kill cancer cells.
Chemotherapy. With this treatment, you ll take medicine before or after cancer surgery to control cancer cell growth or kill lingering cells.
Targeted therapy. Targeted therapy kills cancer cells by attacking specific chemicals within them. Doctors may use it to treat tongue cancer that has returned or spread beyond the tumor.
Immunotherapy. If you have advanced tongue cancer and other treatments aren t working, your doctor could suggest immunotherapy. It works by helping your immune system to locate and kill cancer cells.
You may also want to consider a clinical trial for tongue cancer, where you ll have the chance to try a new treatment. Talk to your health care team if you re interested in joining a clinical trial.
After any treatment, you ll need regular checkups to make sure the cancer hasn t come back.
The earlier a doctor diagnoses your tongue cancer, the more likely you are to have a successful treatment. The 5-year relative survival rate for tongue cancer is 69.7%. This number represents how many people with tongue cancer are alive at the end of 5 years.
Complications of Tongue Cancer Treatment
Treatment of tongue cancer can cause other health problems. Here s a look at some of them:
An abnormal passageway that forms between your mouth and the skin on your face
Inflammation of the mucous membranes that line your mouth and gastrointestinal tract
We know that many cases of base-of-the-tongue cancer are caused by HPV. Some things that may make you less likely to get this type of cancer are:
Get vaccinated for HPV, depending on your age. SpeakÂ to your doctor about your options.
If you are sexually active, use latex condoms every time you have sex.
Facing a serious illness like tongue cancer can be worrying, but there are ways to cope. Ask your doctor questions about your cancer and treatment options and look for reliable sources of information. Stay connected with friends and family, involve them in your life, and accept their offers of help. Finally, find someone to talk to, like a counselor or support group, who can provide valuable support during this challenging time.