Skin Infections Bacterial Skin Infections Fungal Skin Infections Viral Skin Infections
Warts are noncancerous growths that develop on your skin or mucous membranes (soft, fleshy areas such as inside your mouth and genitals). They vary widely in shape and appearance â some are round, some are flat, and some are threadlike. Theyâ re usually not a problem, but sometimes they can be painful or make it difficult to walk (like if you have a wart on your foot). You also might feel self-conscious about how the warts look.
Warts are fairly common. About 1 in 10 people get them at some point. Theyâ re more common in children, people with weakened immune systems, and people who regularly handle raw meat.
There are different types of warts. All of them are caused by the human papillomavirus (HPV).
HPV is a virus that spreads through cuts and skin-to-skin contact during sex. It usually enters your body through areas of skin that are moist, soft, or damaged.
Once the virus has gotten in, it causes extra cells to grow in that spot. When this happens, your skin will form a hard, thick lump.
There are many different types of HPV â over 100 types, in fact. Some of them can cause warts. The type of warts you get (and where you get them) depends on the type of HPV you have.
There are several types of warts based on how they look, the strain of HPV that causes them, and what parts of your body they affect.
Common warts form rough bumps on your hands. Theyâ re pretty small, ranging from the size of a pinprick to a pencil eraser. You might notice tiny black dots, which are actually dead blood vessels. This type of wart is usually caused by HPV types 2 or 4.
Plantar warts affect the soles (also called the plantar surface) of the feet. They usually appear as flat growths flecked with small clotted Â blood vessels that look like tiny black dots.Â They can grow deeper into your foot, sometimes becoming large and painful. Theyâ re caused by HPV types 1, 2, 4, 27 and 57.
This is another type of wart that grows on your feet. These warts tend to be flat, white, pinhead-sized marks on the balls of your feet and under your toes. Theyâ re caused by HPV type 2.
Genital warts can appear in your pubic area, on your genitals, in or around your Â anus , in your Â vagina , and in your mouth. Theyâ re small, hard, and rough and are usually flesh-colored or whitish-gray. The warts may look like cauliflower, or they may be very tiny and difficult to see. They often appear in clusters. They usually aren t painful, although they may cause mild pain, discomfort, bleeding, and Â itching . Most genital warts are caused by HPV types 6 and 11.
Flat warts are smoother, flatter, and smaller than other warts. They generally occur in groups on your face, back of the hands, neck, or legs. A single grouping can have up to 100 flat warts. This type of wart is more common in Â teens and children than in adults. Theyâ re caused by HPV types 3, 10, and 28.
These are threadlike growths that form around your eyes, nose, and mouth. Theyâ re caused by HPV types 1, 2, 4, 27 and 29.
In most cases, warts on the skin are harmless and may go away without treatment. Some, like flat warts, may take a few months or even years to go away. If you have a weakened immune system, your body will have a hard time fighting off the virus that causes warts, so you may need a doctorâ s help.
If you want your wart to go away faster, there are treatments that can help. But keep in mind that warts sometimes come back after treatment, and you may need more than one type of treatment. Although doctors try to clear warts quickly, most methods to remove them require multiple treatment sessions.Â
Your doctor can use liquid nitrogen to freeze the wart. It may take three or four appointments before the wart blisters and peels off. Unfortunately, the treatment can be painful and may cause blistering or scarring.
Your doctor will put liquid cantharidin on your wart. Over the next week, a blister will form around the wart, cutting off its blood supply. A week later, youâ ll go back to your doctorâ s office so they can cut off the dead wart.Â
Some wart medications are prescription-strength versions of over-the-counter options, such as salicylic acid. Other medications includeÂ bleomycin, which is injected into a wart to kill it, and Â imiquimod (Aldara,Â Zyclara), an Â immunotherapy drug that stimulates your Â immune system to fight off the wart virus. Another option for children is 5-fluorouracil.
When warts can t be removed by other therapies, a doctor can do surgery to cut away the wart. They ll destroy the base of the wart using a curette and an electric needle. The process may leave a scar.
This procedure uses an intense beam of light (a laser) to burn and destroy wart tissue. It can leave a scar.
You may be able to take care of mild warts at home. You can try:
Over-the-counter wart treatments come in several forms (gel, ointments, or pads) and have salicylic acid as their active ingredient. When you apply the treatment on a regular basis, the acid gradually dissolves the wart tissue, one layer at a time. The process may take several weeks or months. This strategy works on about 50%-70% of common warts.Â
Over-the-counter freezing spray products
Some freezing products and liquid nitrogen sprays can help you freeze your wart at home.
This folk remedy involves covering your wart with duct tape. You leave the duct tape on for 6 days, then take it off and soak the wart in warm water. You can use an emery board or pumice stone to gently remove dead skin. Then, you leave the wart exposed to open air for about 12 hours and repeat the process until the wart goes away.
Research has shown that this method doesnâ t work very well, and medical experts don t recommend it.Â
If you have diabetes or a weakened immune system, or if you need a wart surgically removed, go to a doctor. Never try to cut away or rip off a wart on your own. It could become infected.
HPV, the virus that causes warts, spreads through touch. If you touch a wart, or something that has been in contact with a wart (like a towel), you could get infected. The virus gets into your body through cracked skin, cuts, or fleshy areas such as your genitals.
Here are some ways to lower your risk of getting warts:
Donâ t borrow or share towels, razors, nail clippers, or other personal items.
Donâ t pull or pick at your cuticles (the dead skin around your nails).
Moisturize regularly to keep skin smooth and healthy.
Wear flip-flops in public locker rooms and swimming pools.
Use Â condoms or dental dams during sexual activity.
Have sex only with a partner who isn t having Â sex with other people.
Avoid having sex with anyone who has visible genital warts.
Regularly get tested and treated for sexually transmitted infections.
If you already have warts, there are many simple ways to keep them from spreading. You can:
Shave around the warts, not letting the razor touch them.
Keep your feet dry (if you have plantar warts).
Wash your hands after touching the warts.
If you have genital warts or HPV, tell your partner(s). They may want to get tested for HPV. You also can protect them by using a condom or dental dam during sexual activity. Donâ t have sex when you have visible warts.
Warts are skin growths caused by some types of HPV. They can appear in a variety of places, shapes, and forms. Most are harmless and go away on their own. But if your wart becomes painful, you can try some home remedies or talk to your doctor about medical removal options. To avoid spreading warts, cover them with a bandage and wash your hands after touching them.
Warts are caused by certain types of human papillomavirus (HPV).
Thereâ s no cure for the virus that causes warts. Home remedies and medical treatments can make your warts go away, but you can still spread the virus to other people. The warts may come back one day.
HPV, the virus that causes warts, spreads through touch. If you touch a wart, you will be exposed to the virus and could spread it to someone else.
They can, but it might take a while. Approximately 65% disappear within 2 years. But some treatments can help you get rid of your wart sooner.
Your doctor can surgically remove a wart.
What happens if you pick a wart and it bleeds?Â
Avoid touching your wart. Picking at it could spread the virus, and ripping it off could lead to the sore getting infected. Cover the wart with a bandage.