What Is Heart Failure? Explore heart failure: its types, causes, symptoms, diagnosis, and treatments to improve heart health and quality of life.
Explore heart failure: its types, causes, symptoms, diagnosis, and treatments to improve heart health and quality of life.
Understanding Heart Failure Heart failure is described as a where the heart struggles to pump blood effectively, often due to weakened or stiff heart muscles.Â
Heart failure is described as a where the heart struggles to pump blood effectively, often due to weakened or stiff heart muscles.Â
A Glossary of Heart Failure Terms Explore A to Z Â glossary of heart failure terms, such as Ablation, Angiogenesis, Holter Monitor, Maze Procedure, and many more.
Explore A to Z Â glossary of heart failure terms, such as Ablation, Angiogenesis, Holter Monitor, Maze Procedure, and many more.
Answers to Common Questions About Heart Failure Learn the key differences between heart failure, heart disease, and heart attack, tips on managing symptoms, and lifestyle changes.
Answers to Common Questions About Heart Failure
Learn the key differences between heart failure, heart disease, and heart attack, tips on managing symptoms, and lifestyle changes.
Heart Failure Symptoms The symptoms of heart failure may be mild, moderate, or severe, depending on how weak your heart is.
The symptoms of heart failure may be mild, moderate, or severe, depending on how weak your heart is.
Understanding Heart Failure -- Symptoms Heart failure symptoms: breathlessness, swelling, cough, fatigue, weight gain, dizziness, and irregular heartbeats from fluid buildup.
Heart failure symptoms: breathlessness, swelling, cough, fatigue, weight gain, dizziness, and irregular heartbeats from fluid buildup.
Congestive Heart Failure: What Happens? Congestive heart failure means the heart can t pump blood effectively, causing fluid buildup, swelling, and fatigue.
Congestive heart failure means the heart can t pump blood effectively, causing fluid buildup, swelling, and fatigue.
Difference Between Heart Failure and Heart Attack Heart attacks happen suddenly from blocked arteries; heart failure develops gradually as the heart weakens, leading to fluid buildup.
Difference Between Heart Failure and Heart Attack
Heart attacks happen suddenly from blocked arteries; heart failure develops gradually as the heart weakens, leading to fluid buildup.
High Blood Pressure and Heart Failure Hypertension is a major risk factor for HF. Two-thirds of people whose hearts can t pump enough blood also have high BP.
Hypertension is a major risk factor for HF. Two-thirds of people whose hearts can t pump enough blood also have high BP.
Medications That Can Cause Heart Failure Heart failureÂ is often caused by other health problems, likeÂ heart diseaseÂ orÂ diabetes. But commonÂ medicationsÂ can also bring it on.
Medications That Can Cause Heart Failure
Heart failureÂ is often caused by other health problems, likeÂ heart diseaseÂ orÂ diabetes. But commonÂ medicationsÂ can also bring it on.
How Are Heart Failure and Sleep Related? SleepÂ is important, whether yourÂ heart is healthy or not. It helps your heart as well as your energy levels and overall health.
How Are Heart Failure and Sleep Related?
SleepÂ is important, whether yourÂ heart is healthy or not. It helps your heart as well as your energy levels and overall health.
Heart Failure Treatment and Diagnosis Heart failure means that your heart isn t working as efficiently as it should. Explore its diagnosis and treatments.
Heart failure means that your heart isn t working as efficiently as it should. Explore its diagnosis and treatments.
Heart Failure Treatment Heart failure care involves meds, surgeries, lifestyle changes, and team support for holistic management.
Heart failure care involves meds, surgeries, lifestyle changes, and team support for holistic management.
Heart Failure Treatment by Stage Heart failure treatment by stage guides care and lifestyle changes, as outlined by AHA/ACC, ensuring progressive management.
Heart failure treatment by stage guides care and lifestyle changes, as outlined by AHA/ACC, ensuring progressive management.
Treatment Options for End-Stage Heart Failure End-stage heart failure treatments include drugs, devices, transplants, and palliative care, focusing on quality of life.
Treatment Options for End-Stage Heart Failure
End-stage heart failure treatments include drugs, devices, transplants, and palliative care, focusing on quality of life.
Stem Cells for Heart Failure Treatment Stem cell therapy offers hope for repairing heart damage; clinical trials explore its potential in treating heart failure.
Stem cell therapy offers hope for repairing heart damage; clinical trials explore its potential in treating heart failure.
Living With Heart Failure The article addresses many lifestyle questions you may have and offers tips that should make performing daily activities easier.
The article addresses many lifestyle questions you may have and offers tips that should make performing daily activities easier.
How Does Your Body Try to Make Up for Heart Failure? Heart failure doesnâ t mean your heart has stopped; it means the heart canâ t pump enough blood to meet your bodyâ s oxygen needs.Â
How Does Your Body Try to Make Up for Heart Failure?
Heart failure doesnâ t mean your heart has stopped; it means the heart canâ t pump enough blood to meet your bodyâ s oxygen needs.Â
Heart Failure and a Low-Sodium Diet: What to Know Low salt intake is one of the most effective ways to alleviate heart failure symptoms. Sodium helps fluid balance in the bloodstream.
Heart Failure and a Low-Sodium Diet: What to Know
Low salt intake is one of the most effective ways to alleviate heart failure symptoms. Sodium helps fluid balance in the bloodstream.
What Problems Can Heart Failure Cause? As your heart works harder, it may become weaker. Your body gets less oxygen, affecting organs like the lungs, kidneys, and liver.
As your heart works harder, it may become weaker. Your body gets less oxygen, affecting organs like the lungs, kidneys, and liver.
Sign up for our free Heart Health Newsletter
Common Heart Failure Treatments There are many ways to treat heart failure. Learn more about the options available.
There are many ways to treat heart failure. Learn more about the options available.
Treating Heart Failure in Women Do men and women receive the same heart failure medications? And are women treated as aggressively?
Do men and women receive the same heart failure medications? And are women treated as aggressively?
From Heart Failure to Heart Health Advocate As a heart transplant recipient, Arthur D. Vaughn says conversations about our health should be as common as water cooler talk about last nightâ s game.
From Heart Failure to Heart Health Advocate
As a heart transplant recipient, Arthur D. Vaughn says conversations about our health should be as common as water cooler talk about last nightâ s game.
Awareness of Heart Failure in Women Women often have more severe symptoms of heart failure, but is that because they can be dismissed and underdiagnosed?
Women often have more severe symptoms of heart failure, but is that because they can be dismissed and underdiagnosed?
You can also search by physician, practice, or hospital name