How Do I Know If I Have COPD? You must go to a doctor to know for sure whether you have COPD. Thatâ s because there are things to consider for a diagnosis.
You must go to a doctor to know for sure whether you have COPD. Thatâ s because there are things to consider for a diagnosis.
What Is Emphysema? Emphysema is a form of chronic (long-term) lung disease that causes shortness of breath.
Emphysema is a form of chronic (long-term) lung disease that causes shortness of breath.
Asthma vs. COPD: What s the Difference? Some people have asthma and COPD at the same time. If you have symptoms of both, your doctor may call it asthma-COPD overlap.
Some people have asthma and COPD at the same time. If you have symptoms of both, your doctor may call it asthma-COPD overlap.
Whatâ s the Prognosis for COPD? If youâ ve been diagnosed with COPD, you might be wondering what comes next. Talk with your doctor to understand what to expect.
If youâ ve been diagnosed with COPD, you might be wondering what comes next. Talk with your doctor to understand what to expect.
COPD: What Are the Symptoms? Many people donâ t notice any symptoms of COPD in the early stages. Sometimes there arenâ t any.
Many people donâ t notice any symptoms of COPD in the early stages. Sometimes there arenâ t any.
Emphysema Symptoms With emphysema, you feel short of breath after the slightest activity. Over time, you may feel breathless even when sitting still.
With emphysema, you feel short of breath after the slightest activity. Over time, you may feel breathless even when sitting still.
What to Know About COPD and Cough An ongoing cough is a symptom of COPD, especially when it comes with mucus. It isnâ t pleasant, but there are ways to manage it.
An ongoing cough is a symptom of COPD, especially when it comes with mucus. It isnâ t pleasant, but there are ways to manage it.
COPD Bloating: Why It Happens and What You Can Do Bloating of the belly and feeling full very quickly were the most common symptoms of COPD.
COPD Bloating: Why It Happens and What You Can Do
Bloating of the belly and feeling full very quickly were the most common symptoms of COPD.
COPD and Your Medical Care Team Who helps you manage yourÂ COPD? Itâ s more than just one doctor. Itâ s a medical care team.
Who helps you manage yourÂ COPD? Itâ s more than just one doctor. Itâ s a medical care team.
COPD Stages and the GOLD Criteria Doctors use stages to describe how severe your COPD is. This system is called the GOLD staging or grading system.
Doctors use stages to describe how severe your COPD is. This system is called the GOLD staging or grading system.
Stage I (Early Stage) COPD COPD sneaks up on you, taking years to show itself. If you re not paying close attention, the first stage can be easy to miss.
COPD sneaks up on you, taking years to show itself. If you re not paying close attention, the first stage can be easy to miss.
Stage II (Moderate Stage) COPD By stage II of COPD, your symptoms are usually no longer something you can just shrug off. They start to affect your daily life.
By stage II of COPD, your symptoms are usually no longer something you can just shrug off. They start to affect your daily life.
What Are the Treatments for COPD? COPD treatment goal is to help you breathe easier and help regular activities. Medications along with lifestyle approaches can help.Â
COPD treatment goal is to help you breathe easier and help regular activities. Medications along with lifestyle approaches can help.Â
COPD Medications When you have COPD, medications can go a long way to help you breathe more easily and boost your quality of life.
When you have COPD, medications can go a long way to help you breathe more easily and boost your quality of life.
Your Treatment Choices for Moderate-to-Severe COPD When you have moderate to severe disease, you and your doctor will work together to find the right therapy for you.
Your Treatment Choices for Moderate-to-Severe COPD
When you have moderate to severe disease, you and your doctor will work together to find the right therapy for you.
Which Devices Help Treat COPD? Although there s no cure for COPD, devices like Inhaler, portable oxygen and mobility aids can help you cope with your COPD.
Although there s no cure for COPD, devices like Inhaler, portable oxygen and mobility aids can help you cope with your COPD.
Managing Your Daily Routine With COPD Daily activities can be a challenge with COPD. It will make it difficult to handle household chores and other day-to-day tasks.
Daily activities can be a challenge with COPD. It will make it difficult to handle household chores and other day-to-day tasks.
Everyday Tips for Living With COPD COPD is a challenge, but you have many ways to manage these challenges. Here are some tips for everyday living with COPD.
COPD is a challenge, but you have many ways to manage these challenges. Here are some tips for everyday living with COPD.
Talking to Your Family and Friends About COPD When you open up to those who are closest to you about how COPD affects your life, they better understand what you deal with daily.
Talking to Your Family and Friends About COPD
When you open up to those who are closest to you about how COPD affects your life, they better understand what you deal with daily.
Sleep Tips for People With COPD COPD symptoms can make it hard for you to get a good night s sleep. Here are tips to improve your sleep quality and manage your COPD.
COPD symptoms can make it hard for you to get a good night s sleep. Here are tips to improve your sleep quality and manage your COPD.
Breathe Easier: 10 Tips for Living Well With COPD Find out how you can live better and breathe easier with COPD.
Breathe Easier: 10 Tips for Living Well With COPD
Find out how you can live better and breathe easier with COPD.
Tips to Manage Your Emphysema These strategies can make your daily life with emphysema easier.
These strategies can make your daily life with emphysema easier.
Singing Helps Strengthen Lungs With COPD â The more I sing, the better my lungs feel,â Michele Rufener says. This granny with a blue mohawk belts heavy metal tunes to strengthen her damaged lungs.
Singing Helps Strengthen Lungs With COPD
â The more I sing, the better my lungs feel,â Michele Rufener says. This granny with a blue mohawk belts heavy metal tunes to strengthen her damaged lungs.
Things That Increase Exacerbation Risk Smoking and air pollution are well-known causes of COPD flares, but there are other not-so-obvious triggers. Hereâ s what else can put you at risk.
Smoking and air pollution are well-known causes of COPD flares, but there are other not-so-obvious triggers. Hereâ s what else can put you at risk.
You can also search by physician, practice, or hospital name