Headaches Basics Headaches can be complicated. Different kinds can have their own set of symptoms, causes, and need different treatments.
Headaches can be complicated. Different kinds can have their own set of symptoms, causes, and need different treatments.
Headache Symptoms Not all headaches are the same. Many headaches also cause other unwanted symptoms, including nausea and vomiting.
Not all headaches are the same. Many headaches also cause other unwanted symptoms, including nausea and vomiting.
What Is a Secondary Headache? For secondary headaches, another disease or condition is the cause. The headache is a symptom.
For secondary headaches, another disease or condition is the cause. The headache is a symptom.
What Your Headache Location Tells You Where your head hurts isn t a foolproof way to diagnose, but the location of your headache can be a starting point.
Where your head hurts isn t a foolproof way to diagnose, but the location of your headache can be a starting point.
What Is Migraine? Migraine is a neurologic disorder that often causes a strong headache. In many people, it happens in stages.
Migraine is a neurologic disorder that often causes a strong headache. In many people, it happens in stages.
Why Migraines Aren t Just a Headache There are key features that make migraine distinct from tension headaches and cluster headaches, which are rare.
There are key features that make migraine distinct from tension headaches and cluster headaches, which are rare.
Migraines vs. Chronic Migraines if you have the condition known as chronic migraine, you get headaches 15 or more days a month for at least 3 months.
if you have the condition known as chronic migraine, you get headaches 15 or more days a month for at least 3 months.
Mixed Tension Migraine These headaches happen more than 15 days each month for at least 3 months. They can be migraine or tension headaches.
These headaches happen more than 15 days each month for at least 3 months. They can be migraine or tension headaches.
What Are Cluster Headaches? Cluster headaches are a series of relatively short but very painful headaches every day for weeks or months at a time.
Cluster headaches are a series of relatively short but very painful headaches every day for weeks or months at a time.
Migraine vs. Cluster Headache Itâ s possible to have both migraine and cluster headaches, but your treatment depends on which one is causing your pain.
Itâ s possible to have both migraine and cluster headaches, but your treatment depends on which one is causing your pain.
What Are Tension Headaches? Tension headaches are also called stress headaches, and theyâ re the most common type for adults.
Tension headaches are also called stress headaches, and theyâ re the most common type for adults.
Tension Headache vs. Migraine The symptoms you get, how long they last, and how intense they are can be different for migraines and tension headaches.
The symptoms you get, how long they last, and how intense they are can be different for migraines and tension headaches.
Hemicrania Continua This rare type of continuous headache doesn t stop. It causes pain on one side of your face or head.
This rare type of continuous headache doesn t stop. It causes pain on one side of your face or head.
What Are Hypnic Headaches? Hypnic headache syndrome is a disorder that happens only while youâ re asleep and mostly affects women over 50.
Hypnic headache syndrome is a disorder that happens only while youâ re asleep and mostly affects women over 50.
Ice Pick Headaches Ice pick headaches feel like someoneâ s stabbing your face with an ice pick. They re also called stabbing headaches.
Ice pick headaches feel like someoneâ s stabbing your face with an ice pick. They re also called stabbing headaches.
New Daily Persistent Headaches New daily persistent headaches (NDPH) begin without warning and go on for 3 months or longer.
New daily persistent headaches (NDPH) begin without warning and go on for 3 months or longer.
Questions for Your Doctor About Migraine Whether you re newly diagnosed with migraine or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Questions for Your Doctor About Migraine
Whether you re newly diagnosed with migraine or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Sign up for our free Migraine Newsletter
Suggested Reads about Migraine Headaches
Remedies That Can Either Help or Hurt a Migraine Which home remedies are good or bad for migraine headaches? Some can go either way. Learn more about getting migraine relief at home.
Remedies That Can Either Help or Hurt a Migraine
Which home remedies are good or bad for migraine headaches? Some can go either way. Learn more about getting migraine relief at home.
Migraine Warning Signs and What You Can Do The earlier you catch a migraine, the easier it can be to treat. Here are a few warning signs from WebMD to watch for and remedies you can use to reduce pain.
Migraine Warning Signs and What You Can Do
The earlier you catch a migraine, the easier it can be to treat. Here are a few warning signs from WebMD to watch for and remedies you can use to reduce pain.
Weird Hacks for Migraine Migraine medications and recommended lifestyle tips can help manage episodes. But when they re just not enough, these weird-sounding hacks may help.
Migraine medications and recommended lifestyle tips can help manage episodes. But when they re just not enough, these weird-sounding hacks may help.
10 Signs Your Headache May Be a Migraine Headache or migraine? Learn 10 ways to tell the difference.
10 Signs Your Headache May Be a Migraine
Headache or migraine? Learn 10 ways to tell the difference.
Top Search Terms for Migraine Headaches
You can also search by physician, practice, or hospital name