Skin Infections Bacterial Skin Infections Fungal Skin Infections Viral Skin Infections
Pigmentation is the coloring of a person s skin . When a person is healthy, their skin color will appear normal. In the case of illness or injury, the person s skin may change color, becoming darker (hyperpigmentation) or lighter (hypopigmentation).
Hyperpigmentation Â is a common, often harmless skin condition caused by an increase in melanin, the substance that is responsible for color (pigment).Â This condition makes certain areas of the skin look darker than the rest. Depending on skin tone and cause, it can show up in different colors (from brown to black) and forms, such as freckles, age spots, or patches of darker skin.
Though it can happen to anyone, regardless of age, skin color, or type, hyperpigmentation is more common and severe in people with darker skin who donâ t use sunscreen often. Plus, excess or irregular melanin production can be more noticeable on darker skin, especially in areas affected by inflammatory skin conditions such as acne.
Many factors can contribute to your skin cells producing too much melanin. Some common ones include medical conditions, medications, and sun exposure.
Health conditions. Certain conditions, such as pregnancy or Addison s disease (decreased function of the adrenal gland), may cause a greater production of melanin and hyperpigmentation.
Sun exposure. Exposure to sunlight is a major cause of hyperpigmentation. It also darkens already hyperpigmented areas.
Drugs. Certain medications, including antibiotics , antiarrhythmics, and antimalarial drugs, can also cause hyperpigmentation.
There are many types of hyperpigmentation.
Melasma is a form of hyperpigmentation characterized by tan or brown patches and spots similar to freckles, most commonly on the face. Women with medium to dark skin tones are more likely to have melasma.Â
It often occurs during pregnancy and is often called the mask of pregnancy. However, men can also develop this condition.
Melasma sometimes goes away or fades on its own after pregnancy or stopping the medication that may trigger it (such as birth control pills); however, it can be long-lasting.
Your doctor may recommend a plan that will likely include:
Sun protection. Wearing a hat, finding shaded areas, and using sunscreens with an SPF of 30 or higher that contain blockers such as zinc oxide or titanium dioxide can help protect you from the sun and prevent your skin from making more pigment.
Topical medications. Your doctor may prescribe prescription creams such as hydroquinone, tretinoin, or a mild corticosteroid, or a cream that combines all three products. If your skin needs a gentler treatment, they may prescribe vitamin C, kojic acid, or azelaic acid).
Procedures. Treatments might include minimally invasive procedures such as a chemical peel, which can get rid of extra pigment, or microneedling, which can help create a more even skin tone.
Your doctor may also suggest other procedures such as light therapy or platelet-rich plasma therapy, which involves taking a small amount of your blood and injecting it back into the affected areas of your skin.
It s best to ask your dermatologist about the possible costs of your specific treatment plan, as most insurances don t cover melasma treatments because they re not seen as medically necessary.
Also, talk to your doctor before treating the condition yourself. They may give you some self-care tips for melasma, such as using gentle skin products, tinted sunscreen, and makeup.
Sunspots are small, flat, tan to dark brown patches on the skin. They are also called age spots or liver spots. You may have these spots from staying under the sun or sunburn. They often appear on the face, chest, and hands.
You donâ t need to treat sunspots because theyâ re merely a sign that youâ ve exposed the skin area to the sun. However, if they bother you, you can see a dermatologist who may recommend lightening treatments such as creams, lotions, and gels containing hydroquinone, corticosteroids, or retinoids. They may also treat it with chemical peels or dermabrasion (a procedure that involves using a device or scrub to remove the top skin layer with the age spots).
Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation is a type of hyperpigmentation that results from skin inflammation or injury, such as from burns, acne, or skin rashes. It happens more often in people with darker skin. Although these spots usually fade on their own, they can take months to years. You can see a dermatologist to treat it.
Post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation treatment
Your doctor will first treat the inflammation or injury causing the hyperpigmentation. Then, they may recommend lightening treatments, including the ones you apply to your skin, such as creams with hydroquinone, tretinoin, and fluocinolone acetonide. You may need chemical peels and laser therapy if you have a serious case of hyperpigmentation. Wear sunscreen and sun protection daily.
Freckles are tan or brown spots that typically show up in childhood on sun-exposed skin. They tend to get darker and increase in number with more time spent in the sun and heat. But they also lighten up during winter. Freckles are common, harmless, and tend to run in families. Youâ ll likely find them on the face, neck, hands, arms, back, and upper chest.
If you have freckles, the first and most important thing to do is to wear sunscreen during the day and avoid the sun when possible. You can also see a dermatologist who may recommend treatments that make freckles less obvious on your face. These treatments include products you apply on the affected skin, which may contain retinol or retinoid, acid, chemical peels, and laser therapy to remove the topmost skin layer.
You can try to manage hyperpigmentation at home by:
Using sun protection. Wearing sunscreen and sun-protective clothing and avoiding the sun as much as possible can help prevent hyperpigmentation. It can also keep your hyperpigmentation from getting worse.Â
Taking your vitamins. Hyperpigmentation may occur when youâ re deficient in Vitamin B12, especially if you have a darker skin tone. Eating foods high in vitamin B12 and other essential nutrients, such as beef liver, salmon, yogurt, eggs, and tuna, can help manage hyperpigmentation. Talk to your doctor if youâ re considering supplements.
Using over-the-counter lightening products. Some creams, lotions, and serums with ingredients such as azelaic acid, glycolic acid, kojic acid, salicylic acid, and vitamin C may help lighten hyperpigmentation spots or reduce the amount of melanin your body produces. Talk to your dermatologist if youâ re considering using any product consistently to treat any skin concern.
Keeping your skin healthy. Staying hydrated with water and water-rich foods such as watermelon, oranges, and cucumber, eating a healthy, balanced diet, and consistently following a simple skin care routine as your dermatologist recommends are healthy habits that can improve your skin health and help prevent or manage hyperpigmentation.
Hypopigmentation is a condition in which patches of skin appear lighter than others. It occurs when the body doesnâ t produce as much melanin as it should.Â
Hypopigmentation often shows up as lighter patches or as white-looking areas on your skin. These patches can be anywhere on the body. They may be small or spread over a larger area, as with conditions such as vitiligo and albinism.
There are many causes of hypopigmentation.
Vitiligo causes smooth, white patches on the skin that can be more obvious in people with darker skin.Â In some people, these patches can appear all over the body. It is an autoimmune disorder in which the pigment-producing cells are damaged.Â Anyone can have vitiligo at any age. It can start when youâ re a child but often happens before age 30. You may be likely to have it if you or a family member has other autoimmune diseases such as Addisonâ s disease and type 1 diabetes.
There is no cure for vitiligo, but several treatments exist, including cosmetic cover-ups, corticosteroid creams, calcineurin inhibitors ( ElidelÂ cream, Protopic ointment), or ultraviolet light treatments. The Janus kinase inhibitor ruxolitinib ( Opzelura ) has been approved to treat nonsegmental vitiligo in adults and kids aged 12 or older.
Albinism is a rare inherited disorder caused by the absence of an enzyme that produces melanin. This results in a complete lack of pigmentation in skin, hair , and eyes . People with albinism have an abnormal gene that restricts the body from producing melanin. This disorder can occur in any race but is most common among white people.
Having albinism can make you more sensitive to the sun, putting you at a higher risk of sun damage and skin cancer. When your eye parts such as your retina and iris donâ t make enough melanin,Â it can affect your eyesight and make you sensitive to light.
There is no cure for albinism.Â Any treatment, whether surgery or medication, recommended by your doctor will protect your skin health and eyesight. Use sunscreen to reduce your risk of sun damage and skin cancer.
Tinea versicolor is a common fungal skin infection that causes small, discolored scaly patches. These patches are caused by the fungus that makes azelaic acid, a substance that stops the skin from making pigment.
If you have darker skin, you may notice lighter patches; if you have fairer skin, youâ ll notice darker or lighter patches. Tinea versicolor often doesnâ t involve other symptoms, but some people also notice itching in affected areas.
You can buy over-the-counter antifungal medicines to apply to your affected areas to treat tinea versicolor. If your symptoms donâ t get better, see a doctor. They may recommend stronger prescription products or medicines you take by mouth, such as fluconazole .
If you ve had a skin infection, blisters , burns, or other trauma to your skin, you may have a loss of pigmentation in the affected area. The good news with this type of pigment loss is that it s usually not permanent, but it may take a long time to re-pigment. Cosmetics can be used to cover the area, while the body regenerates the pigment.
You may also have hypopigmentation due to other skin conditions, such as:
You can make hypopigmentation less obvious and reduce your risk of more skin problems with the help of the following:
Cosmetics. You can use makeup products such as concealers and foundation, skin dyes, and self-tanners on the affected areas to make them appear like the rest of your skin.
Sunscreen and protective clothing. Hypopigmentation can increase your skin sensitivity to the sun and raise your risk of sun damage and skin cancer. Wear sunscreen with an SPF of at least 30 during the day, avoid staying under the sun when you can, and wear protective clothing.
Alternative remedies. Some experts recommend applying powdered bakuchi seeds in coconut oil and ginger on hypopigmented areas. However, doing this may cause your skin to have side effects such as burning, pain, and redness. Talk to your dermatologist before following any alternative remedies for your hypopigmentation.
Hyperpigmentation isnâ t always preventable. But you can do a few things to reduce your risk of having it.
Apply sunscreen daily, every 2 hours. Wear it again after swimming or sweating.Â
When outside, wear protective clothing and accessories, such as a wide-brimmed hat, and always stay in the shade when possible.
Stay indoors when the sun is at its peak, between 10 a.m. and 2 p.m.
Follow a gentle and simple skin care routine that includes cleansing, moisturizing, and wearing sunscreen. Ask your dermatologist for the best routine for your case.
Diligently follow your treatment for whatever is causing the hyperpigmentation as your dermatologist prescribes.
Receiving immediate treatment for skin conditions that cause it, such as psoriasis, eczema, and tinea versicolor
Reducing your exposure to chemicals that burn your skin or cause trauma
Treating skin infections as soon as you have them and following through with treatment
Wearing sunscreen and protective clothing at all times during the day
Hyperpigmentation and hypopigmentation are skin conditions that involve problems with how your body produces melanin. They are often unpreventable, but getting treatment as soon as you start noticing symptoms can reduce how much and serious they appear. Treatments to improve skin discoloration may take a few months to a year. Keep using them even if you feel like theyâ re not working. Avoid staying under the sun as much as you can, and wear sunscreen and sun protection clothing when outdoors.
Hyperpigmentation and Hypopigmentation FAQs
How to treat hyperpigmentation on dark skin?
Skin lightening therapy can treat hyperpigmentation. If you have dark skin, your doctor may suggest using products containing retinol and azelaic acid and treatments such as laser therapy.
Is vitamin C good for hyperpigmentation?
Yes, vitamin C is good for hyperpigmentation. It can help brighten affected areas and protect your skin from the harmful effects of the sun.
Hyperpigmentation doesnâ t go away completely, but treatment can help reduce how noticeable it is.
Which hormone is responsible for hyperpigmentation?
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone is responsible for regulating your skin color.
What causes loss of pigment in the skin?
Your skin can permanently lose its pigment due to trauma, such as blisters, burns, or infections, or a health condition such as vitiligo.
Scientists are yet to develop a treatment to reverse vitiligo. Your dermatologist will recommend treatments that help slow it or stop it from worsening, restore your skin color, and help promote the regrowth of skin cells that produce color.