Overview What Is Coronavirus? Variants Long COVID
Diagnosis and Treatment Diagnosis Treatment
If you have COVID-19, your symptoms may be relatively mild and manageable at home. Thatâ s true for most people. But if youâ re older or have another illness such as diabetes or heart disease , youâ re more at risk for the serious form of COVID-19 .
Some people -- about 1 in 6 -- will have complications, including some that are life-threatening. Many of these complications may be caused by a condition known as cytokine release syndrome or a cytokine storm. This is when an infection triggers your immune system to flood your bloodstream with inflammatory proteins called cytokines. They can kill tissue and damage your organs, including your lungs, heart, and kidneys.
COVID-19 complications may include the following.
When you have acute respiratory failure , your lungs might not pump enough oxygen into your blood or might not take enough carbon dioxide out. Both of these problems can happen at the same time.
Acute respiratory failure has been the leading cause of death for those who have died of COVID-19.
Some people with COVID-19 get severe pneumonia Â in both lungs. COVID-19 pneumonia is a serious illness that can be deadly. When you haveÂ pneumonia, the air sacs in your lungs become inflamed, making it harder to breathe.
Images of very ill COVID-19 patientsâ lungs show them filled with fluid, pus, and cell debris. In those cases, patientsâ bodies werenâ t able to transfer oxygen to the blood to keep their systems working properly.
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS)
Â Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) was one of the most common complications of COVID-19.
With ARDS, the lungs are so severely damaged that fluid begins to leak into them. As a result, the body has trouble getting oxygen into the bloodstream. You may need mechanical help to breathe -- such as a ventilator -- until your lungs recover.
Most seriously ill patients run the greatest risk of liver damage. It s unclear whether the virus harms the liver or if it happens for another reason, Â but besides the lungs, the liver usually suffers the biggest injuries from COVID-19.
Acute liver injury and liver failure are life-threatening complications. (â Acuteâ means it happens suddenly.)
Many hospitalized with COVID-19 have developed heart problems, including arrhythmias andÂ high levels of other cardiac ailments. But itâ s not clear whether the virus itself affected patientsâ hearts, or if the damage happened simply because the illness caused such stress on their bodies overall.
COVID-19 also may also cause cardiac problems, including myocarditis that can begin or last after someone has recovered fromÂ the disease.
A secondary infection means that you get an infection unrelated to the first problem you had. In this case, it means someone with COVID-19 gets infected with something else.
Sometimes, a person fighting off, Â or recovering from, a virus gets infected by bacteria. Strep and staph are common culprits. This can be serious enough to raise the risk of death.
This is not a common complication, but if it happens, itâ s serious. If your kidneys stop working properly, doctors will start treatment to stop the damage. You might get dialysis (in which a machine filters your blood) until your kidneys get back to working normally. But sometimes, the damage doesnâ t heal and people get chronic kidney disease , which would need to be managed long-term.
Sepsis happens when your bodyâ s reaction to an infection misfires. The chemicals released into your bloodstream to battle the illness donâ t trigger the right response, and instead your organs are damaged. If the process isnâ t stopped, you can go into whatâ s called septic shock. If your blood pressure drops too much, septic shock can be fatal.
When you have disseminated intravascular coagulation, or DIC, the bodyâ s blood-clotting response doesnâ t work right. Abnormal clots form, which can lead to internal bleeding or organ failure.
DIC was not uncommon in those who died of COVID.
A condition called disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) causes your bodyâ s blood-clotting response to work differently than it should. Unusual clots form, which can lead to internal bleeding or organ failure and death.
Those hospitalized with COVID have been found to be more likely to develop clots than those hospitalized with the flu. Some were in patientsâ legs (deep vein thrombosis or DVT), lungs (pulmonary embolism or PE), or arteries.Â
COVID-19-associated coagulopathy (CAC) is a life-threatening condition caused by the virus. Itâ s marked by different protein levels in your blood than the ones caused by DIC.
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children
A number of children and teens have been hospitalized with a condition called multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) or pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome (PMIS) It is linked to COVID. Symptoms include fever, belly pain, vomiting, diarrhea, rash, headache, and confusion. Theyâ re similar to those of toxic shock syndrome or Kawasaki disease, which causes inflamed blood vessels in children.
Some people whoâ ve had COVID-19 develop a condition similar to chronic fatigue syndrome. They may have a brain fog, severe fatigue, pain, trouble thinking, or dizziness.
This is an extremely rare condition, but itâ s one COVID-19 researchers are watching. In rhabdomyolysis, your muscles break down and tissue dies. As cells fall apart, a protein called myoglobin floods your bloodstream. If your kidneys canâ t flush it out of your blood quickly enough, it can overwhelm them and cause death.