Overview What Is Coronavirus? Variants Long COVID
Diagnosis and Treatment Diagnosis Treatment
When you re pregnant , you d expect to have all kinds of questions and worries. What if I get COVID? may be one of them.
Doctors and scientists are still learning how the virus affects everyone , including expectant mothers and their unborn babies. Here s what they know.
Does pregnancy make me more likely to have a severe case of COVID-19?
Yes. While in general, your overall risk of getting seriously ill is low, your chances of getting severely ill from COVID-19 are higher while you re pregnant. You are also at risk for about 42 days afterward giving birth. Pregnant people who have COVID-19Â with symptoms are more likely than non-pregnant people who have COVID-19 to need treatment in an intensive care unit, need a ventilator to help with breathing, or to die from the disease.Â Â
In addition, pregnant people with COVID-19 are also at increased risk for delivering the baby earlier than 37 weeksÂ and might be at increased risk for other poor pregnancy outcomes.Â
A few of the things that can raise your risk of getting severely ill are:
Certain health conditions, like obesity or gestational diabetes
Social, economic, and health inequalities
What should I do if I have symptoms of COVID-19 or if I come into contact with someone who has the virus?
If you re exposed to the virus, call your doctor and let them know what happened. They ll probably tell you to watch for signs of illness such as a fever or a cough . If you get these symptoms, call your doctor about getting tested for COVID.
How do I keep myself and my baby as safe as possible?
You can keep safe by getting vaccinated. Experts say the benefits of the COVID-19 vaccine outweigh any known or potential risks of the vaccine during pregnancy. The Â mRNAÂ COVID-19 vaccine (Moderna or Pfizer-BioNTech), is safe before and during pregnancy. Both vaccines show no increased risk for complications like miscarriage, preterm delivery, stillbirth, or birth defects. A vaccine is recommended for people who are pregnant, breastfeeding, trying to get pregnant, or may become pregnant in the future.
Currently, there isnâ t any evidence that suggests the COVID-19 vaccine causes fertility issues in women or men.
It s possible to have mild side effects after you get vaccinated, whether or not you re pregnant.Â
If you run a fever after getting vaccinated, take acetaminophen and call your doctor right away. A prolonged high fever is linked to worse pregnancy outcomes. Also, call the doctor if you think you re having an allergic reaction. Those are rare, and you can get treatment for them. Before you get vaccinated, let your doctor know if you ve had allergic reactions to other vaccines or shots in the past.
If you re pregnant and you have questions about the COVID-19 vaccines, talk to your doctor.Â
If you think you have symptoms, call your doctor. They may prescribe an antiviral medication or recommend that you takeÂ acetaminophen Â to keep your fever down. It s important to rest and drink lots of fluids. You probably won t need to go to the hospital. Call your doctor right away if your symptoms get worse.
If I get the coronavirus before I deliver, can it hurt my baby?
There s no evidence that the virus itself can lead to birth defects, miscarriage , or any other problems. But a fever in early pregnancy, from COVID-19 or any other cause, can raise the chances of birth defects. And severe lung illnesses late in your pregnancy can make you more likely to deliver your baby prematurely. Some babies born to women who had coronavirus were born preterm. But it s not clear whether the virus was to blame.
If I have the coronavirus, can I pass it to my baby during pregnancy or delivery?
Some newborns have tested positive for COVID-19. But that doesn t necessarily mean they picked it up from their mothers in the womb. The most common way to get COVID-19 is through respiratory droplets that a sick person coughs or sneezes. Experts believe it s more likely that infected babies picked it up through droplets after birth from their mother or a caregiver.
If I have coronavirus, can I breastfeed my baby?
Evidence suggests that the coronavirus is not spread through breast milk. That doesn t mean you can t pass on the virus through coughing or sneezing while nursing. The safest option may be to pump and have someone who isn t infected feed your baby. If you really want to nurse your baby yourself, wash your hands before breastfeeding , and consider wearing a face mask. Take these same precautions while bottle-feeding your baby.
Should I take any extra steps to protect myself besides the ones the CDC and state and local government recommend for everyone?
There s no evidence that pregnancy makes you any more likely to get coronavirus. Still, it s a serious threat to everyone. You should take all the recommended steps to avoiding getting sick. Those include washing your hands often.
If I have the coronavirus, will my delivery still go as planned?
There s no evidence that women with COVID-19 shouldn t deliver vaginally. But delivery might be different from what you expected.
One group of experts suggests that if the mother has COVID-19, it might be helpful to leave the vernix -- a white, waxy coating on newborns skin -- on for 24 hours after birth. The coating contains antimicrobial substances that could protect against infection.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommends that babies born to women who have the coronavirus be isolated and monitored for symptoms.