Overview Substance Abuse Addiction Risk Factors Screening Tests Complications Consequences Intervention Seeking Help Detox Treatment Recovery Relapse
Alcohol Use Disorder The Basics Screening Tests Complications Consequences Intervention Detox, Withdrawal Treatment Recovery Relapse
Opioid Use Disorder The Basics Complications Detox, Withdrawal Treatment Recovery Relapse Overdose Harm Reduction Support Resources
Binge drinking is when you drink enough alcohol to bring your blood-alcohol content up to the legal limit for driving. That works out to about five alcoholic drinks for men or four for women in less than 2 hours. A drink is 12 ounces of beer, 5 ounces of wine, or 1.5 ounces of liquor.
Most American adults drinkÂ alcohol Â at least occasionally, but about 1 in 4 knock back several drinks in a short period of time at least once a year. About 1 in 6 American adults say they regularly binge drink, sometimes several times a month. They typically have about seven drinks on these binges.
Adults under 35 are more likely to do this than other age groups, and men are twice as likely as women. People who make more than 75,000 a year and are more educated are most likely to binge drink.Â  !--td border: 1px solid ccc; br mso-data-placement:same-cell; -- Learn more about alcohol abuse vs dependence .
Binge drinking has different effects on different people. If your alcohol use is causing trouble for you at work, at home, in social situations, or at school, itâ s a problem.
Not being able to slow down or stop your drinking
Needing more alcohol to get the same effect
Giving up activities you enjoy to spend more time drinking
Feeling shaky, weak, or nauseated when you havenâ t had a drink in a while
Taking part in dangerous activities when you drink
Having â blackouts,â or gaps in your memory, after drinking
If you think you have a drinking problem, talk to your doctor. They can give you some tips for cutting back or refer you to help if you need it to quit.
Federal and state health agencies also offer resources and can refer you to someone who can help.
Researchers blame this kind of heavy drinking for more than half of the roughly 88,000 alcohol-related deaths -- from car crashes,Â alcohol poisoning ,Â suicide , and violence -- that happen every year.
Throw off your heartbeat, which can lead to problems likeÂ heart attacks Â or strokes
Make you more likely to take part in risky sexual behavior or get a sexually transmitted disease ( STD )
Raise the odds that youâ ll be a victim of sexual violence
And it has costs beyond the bar tab. Heavy drinking is believed to cost the U.S. economy more than 200 billion a year in lost productivity, health costs, and property damage.
Short- and long-term effects of binge drinking
Short-term effects of binge drinking include:
Poor motor control and slower reaction times
Miscarriage or stillbirth in pregnant women, or fetal alcohol spectrum disorders in their babies
Alcohol poisoning, which can lead to vomiting, seizures, a coma, and death
Higher chances of breast , throat,Â esophagus , orÂ colon cancer
Nine out of 10 binge drinkers arenâ t dependent on alcohol, but doctors and scientists think theyâ re more likely to develop alcohol use disorder.
The chances are especially high for people who drink heavily during their teen years. Teenage binge drinkers are about three times more likely to develop alcohol use disorder.
Take these steps to lower your risk while drinking:
Limit how much you have at one time. If you drink, experts recommend an average of no more than one drink per day for women and two for men.
Alternate alcoholic drinks with nonalcoholic ones. Water is best.
Make a plan. Drink with people you trust, and know how youâ ll get home safely.