Skin Infections Bacterial Skin Infections Fungal Skin Infections Viral Skin Infections
Despite health warnings about sun damage, many of us still expose our skin to the sun s burning rays.Â In one large study, more than a third of adults and nearly 60% of children and teens in the U.S. said they got at least one sunburn over a year.
Years of getting too much sun can lead to early wrinkling and age spots, and it makes you more likely to get skin cancer .
You canÂ take simple steps to keep your skin safe and get relief from sunburn if you stay out in the sun for too long.
You already know the simple explanation behind sunburn. When your skin is exposed to the sun for some time, eventually it burns, turning red and irritated.
Under the skin, things get a little more complicated. The sun gives off three wavelengths of ultraviolet (UV) light:
UVC light doesn t reach the Earth s surface. But UVA and UVB rays can reach deep in your skin, causing skin damage.
Infants and children are more sensitive to UV rays, says Â Elizabeth Bahar Houshmand, MD , a board-certified dermatologist and a fellow of the American Academy of Dermatology.
Sunburn may be the most obvious sign that you ve been sitting outside for too long. But sun damage isn t always visible. Under the surface, ultraviolet light can alter your DNA, leading to early skin aging. Over time, DNA damage can lead to skin cancers, including deadly melanoma .
While people with lighter skin tend to get sunburned more quickly, those with brown and Black skin can also burn. Sunburns may be harder to see on darker skin. But they still cause damage, such as wrinkles and hyperpigmentation, raising your risk of skin cancer.
There are a few types of sunburns. The type you have depends on how deeply the UV rays damage your skin:
First-degree sunburn. This common type damages the outer layer of your skin. Most often, it heals by itself within a week.
Second-degree sunburn. Another common type, it damages the middle layer of your skin. It might cause blisters to form. It can take weeks to heal, and you might need treatment for it.
Third-degree sunburn. This rare type causes severe damage to all the layers of your skin, along with the layer of fat beneath your skin. It s an emergency that needs treatment right away. Most often, fire or chemicals cause third-degree burns, rather than the sun.
When you get a sunburn, your skin hurts and may look red, depending on your skin tone. If the burn is severe, you can have swelling and sunburn blisters. You may even feel like you have the flu, with symptoms such as a fever along with chills, nausea , headache, and weakness.
A few days later, your skin will start peeling and itching as your body tries to rid itself of sun-damaged cells.
Sunburn treatment aims to attack the burn on two fronts â relieving reddened, inflamed skin while easing pain. A few home remedies for sunburn are:
Compresses. Apply cold compresses to your skin or take a cool bath to soothe the burn.
Creams or gels. To take the sting out of your sunburn, gently rub on a cream or gel containing ingredients such as:
Aloe vera. Use 90% aloe vera gel or the juice squeezed directly from the aloe plant. Every tropical culture uses aloe vera as aÂ treatment for sunburn . It soothes damaged skin because it is anti-inflammatory and may prevent the burn from deepening.
1% hydrocortisone. This comes in an over-the-counter (OTC) medicated cream that you can put on your sunburn three times a day for three days.
If you don t have any of these, apply a moisturizing lotion that doesn t contain alcohol.
Refrigerating the cream first will make it feel even better on your sunburned skin.
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). These drugs, such as ibuprofen or naproxen, can ease sunburn swelling and pain all over your body.
Do not pop sunburn blisters. Let them be so they can heal, and talk with your doctor about any blisters that grow very large or painful.
Stay hydrated. Drink plenty of water and other fluids so that you don t become dehydrated.
Avoid the sun. Until your sunburn heals, stay out of the sun.
You may be able to treat the sunburn yourself. But call a doctor if you notice any of these more serious sunburn signs:
SunburnÂ blisters that cover 20% or more of your body, such as your entire chest and belly
Blisters on the face, genitals, or hands
Pus oozing from blisters, which can be a sign of an infection
A dry mouth, thirst, reduced urination, dizziness,Â confusion, or fatigue, which are signs of dehydration
Sunburn on an infant who is younger than 1 year
Also, if you notice any mark, bump, blemish, or mole that is changing, growing, or bleeding, call your doctor. It may be skin cancer, which is often treatable when it s found early.
If you keep getting sunburns, you raise your risk of getting other health complications. Some of these include:
Premature skin aging. Symptoms can include:
Freckles, mainly on your shoulders and face
Fine red veins on your ears, nose, and cheeks
Discolored or dark spots on your face, chest, upper back, arms, and the backs of your hands
Eye trouble.Â Too much sun can damage your eyes. For instance, a cloudy area may form over the lens of your eye. This is called a cataract. It can make your vision blurry or hazy.
Precancer. Â Rough, scaly patches called precancerous lesions may form. There s a chance that these may someday turn into skin cancer.
Skin cancer. The number of sunburns over time increases your chance of developing non-melanoma skin cancer, Houshmand says. Every sunburn counts toward your total risk, she adds.
Skin cancer often starts on body parts that tend to get the most sun, such as your:
Some ways to keep your skin safe when you re outside are:
Watch the clock. The sun s rays are strongest between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. If you can t stay indoors during that period, at least stick to shady spots.
Be mindful of where you are. Â It s extra important to protect your skin if you re at high altitudes or near reflective surfaces such as water, snow, and sand. These locations can raise your risk of sunburns, Houshmand says.
Wear the right clothes. When you have to be outdoors, wear sun-protective clothing, such as:
Use sunscreen. Cover any exposed areas of skin liberally with at least 1 ounce of broad-spectrum sunscreen. That means sunscreen that protects against UVA and UVB rays.
In general, theÂ sunscreen should have an SPF (sun protection factor) of at least 30.Â Houshmand suggests using a sunscreen with an SPF of 50 or above. Follow these tips for applying sunscreen:
Apply sunscreen aboutÂ 15-30 minutes before you go outside.
When you apply screen, don t forget to put it on your lips, the tops of your ears, and your scalp, Houshmand says. These areas sometimes get overlooked.
Use sunscreen even on overcast days, because UV rays can pass through clouds.
Reapply sunscreen every two hours or more often if you re sweating heavily or swimming.
If you wear makeup, apply sunscreen first and then put on your foundation. By itself, foundation doesn t have the broad-spectrum sunscreen that you need, even if it does have some sunscreen in it.
Talk to your doctor. Discuss any medications you take. Some antibiotics, antidepressants , and diabetes drugs can make skin more sensitive to sun. Some drugs that you put on your skin, including Renova and Retin-A, can make your skin very sensitive and cause it to burn quickly. If you use these treatments, ask your doctor how to protect your skin from the sun.
A sunburn is an area of irritated, damaged skin that s caused by getting too much sun.Â
Over time, sunburns can cause your skin to age earlier than usual. They also make you more likely to get skin cancer.Â
To help prevent sunburns, wear sunscreen, dress in hats and other protective clothing, and try to avoid the sun between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m., when UV rays are strongest.
Mild sunburns usually go away within a week. Worse sunburns can take weeks to heal.
What are the complications associated with sunburn?
Sunburns can lead to complications like early skin aging, eye damage, precancerous growths, and skin cancer.
Don t put heavy, petroleum jelly-based ointments on your sunburn, as they will raise your skin s temperature, Elizabeth Bahar Houshmand says. Houshmand is a double board-certified dermatologist. Also, do not use medicines that numb the skin, called topical anesthetics. Some examples are lidocaine and benzocaine. They dry your skin and may cause allergic reactions, Houshmand says. Also, stay away from using creams with fragrances or alcohol, she says. These could irritate your skin.
A sunburn may tan your skin, but it s still skin damage and not healthy, Houshmand says.