Living With Understanding Blood Sugar Diet Exercise Better Living Complications
Type 2 Diabetes Overview Symptoms Causes Diagnosis Tests Prevention Treatment Living Managing Complications Related Diseases
Type 1 Diabetes Overview Treating Managing Complications Related Conditions
Diabetes happens when your blood sugar (blood glucose), which is your body s primary energy source, is too high. There are two types of diabetes:
Type 1 diabetes means your body doesn t make enough insulin. Doctors usually diagnose the condition in kids and young adults, but you can get it at any age. You ll need daily insulin.
Type 2 diabetes is the most common type, and it means your body doesn t use insulin the right way. Your chances of getting the disease go up if you are overweight or obese or if other people in your family have diabetes.
Both types of diabetes have some of the same telltale warning signs.
Your body converts the food you eat into glucose, which your cells use for energy. But your cells need insulin to take in glucose. If your body doesn t make enough or any insulin, or if your cells resist the insulin your body makes, the glucose can t get into them and you have no energy. This can make you hungrier than usual.
A lack of insulin and glucose can also make you more tired than usual.
The average person usually has to pee about four to seven times in 24 hours, but people with diabetes may go a lot more. Why? Normally, your body reabsorbs glucose as it passes through your kidneys. But when diabetes pushes your blood sugar up, your kidneys may not be able to bring it all back in. This causes the body to make more urine, and that takes fluids. The result: You ll have to go more often. You might pee out more, too.
Because you re peeing so much, you can get very thirsty.
Because your body is using fluids to make pee, there s less moisture for other things. You could get dehydrated, and your mouth may feel dry.
Your skin could also feel dry, which may start to itch as well.
Changing fluid levels in your body could cause the lenses in your eyes to swell. They would then change shape and be unable to focus.
If your body can t get energy from your food, it will start burning muscle and fat for energy instead. You may lose weight even though you haven t changed how you eat.
Headache may be a symptom of hypoglycemia, or low blood sugar. It happens when your sugar or glucose level drops very low.
Early Warning Signs of Type 1 Diabetes vs. Type 2 Diabetes
How can you tell if you have diabetes? Most early symptoms are due to higher-than-normal glucose levels in your blood. While symptoms of type 1 and type 2 diabetes are the same, there s a difference in how they appear.
In type 1 diabetes , symptoms show up quickly, in just a few days or weeks, especially in children. The four most common symptoms are:
Type 2 diabetes symptoms may be mild and develop more slowly, especially early on in the disease. It s possible to go for years without realizing you have the condition.
Early Signs of Diabetes in Women vs. Men
There s no major difference in early diabetes signs between men and women, but there may be a few contrasts. Women with the condition may have vaginal yeast infections and urinary tract infections more often, while men with untreated diabetes tend to lose muscle mass.
Early symptoms of type 1 diabetes in children
Type 1 diabetes can happen at any age but tends to crop up in children aged 5 to 6 and 11 to 13. Researchers think this is due to hormones at these ages. Symptoms include:
Peeing more often, including wetting the bed
Vaginal yeast infection in prepubescent girls
Early symptoms of type 2 diabetes in children
Adults are more likely to get type 2 diabetes, but the disease is happening more often in kids because of obesity. Your child may not show any symptoms of the disease, but here are some to look out for:
Skin darkening, especially around the neck, groin, and armpits
Unintended weight loss (this happens more often in type 1 diabetes)
High blood sugar during pregnancy usually has no symptoms. You might feel a little thirstier than normal, have to pee more often, have a dry mouth, or feel tired.
If you have an average chance of getting gestational diabetes, your doctor will likely screen you for the condition between 24 and 28 weeks of pregnancy. But your doctor may test you early in your pregnancy, possibly at your first prenatal visit, if:
You re more likely to get gestational diabetes because you re overweight.
Gestational diabetes runs in your family.
You ve had it during a previous pregnancy.
The screening involves drinking a sugary solution and having your blood sugar tested an hour later. If your blood sugar is high, you ll need a follow-up test, where you ll drink a stronger solution and have your blood sugar tested every hour for 3 hours.
Signs of type 2 diabetes complications may include:
Itchy skin (usually around the vaginal or groin area)
Velvety, dark skin changes of the neck, armpit, and groin, called acanthosis nigricans
Numbness and tingling of the hands and feet
Learn about what you can do to lower your risk of diabetes complications.
If you re older than 45 or have other risks for diabetes, it s important to get tested. When you spot the condition early, you can avoid nerve damage, heart trouble, and other complications.
As a general rule, call your doctor if you:
Feel sick to your stomach, weak, and very thirsty
Are breathing more deeply and faster than normal
Have sweet breath that smells like nail polish remover (a sign of very high ketones)
Diabetes often starts with mild symptoms such as feeling very hungry and tired, needing to pee a lot, being very thirsty, having a dry mouth, itchy skin, and blurry vision. Type 1 diabetes symptoms appear quickly and are more severe, while type 2 symptoms develop slowly. It s important to see a doctor if you have symptoms or have a higher chance of getting diabetes to avoid serious health problems.