What Is Substance Abuse? Substance abuse differs from addiction. Many people with substance abuse problems are able to quit or change their behavior.
Substance abuse differs from addiction. Many people with substance abuse problems are able to quit or change their behavior.
What Is Drug Addiction? Addiction is a disease that affects your brain and behavior. With drug addiction, you canâ t resist the urge to use them.
Addiction is a disease that affects your brain and behavior. With drug addiction, you canâ t resist the urge to use them.
Signs of Drug Addiction Â If youâ re worried that you or a loved one may have an addiction, there are signs to help you know.
Â If youâ re worried that you or a loved one may have an addiction, there are signs to help you know.
Tolerance, Physical Dependence, and Addiction Explained Addiction,â â tolerance,â and â physical dependenceâ are often used interchangeably. But they donâ t mean the same thing.
Tolerance, Physical Dependence, and Addiction Explained
Addiction,â â tolerance,â and â physical dependenceâ are often used interchangeably. But they donâ t mean the same thing.
What Is Alcohol Use Disorder? Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a chronic illness in which you canâ t stop or control your drinking.
Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a chronic illness in which you canâ t stop or control your drinking.
Alcohol Use Disorder: Myths and Facts Are you falling for common misconceptions about alcohol use disorder?
Are you falling for common misconceptions about alcohol use disorder?
The Stages of Alcoholism No one becomes addicted to alcohol overnight. You donâ t catch alcoholism the way you do the common cold.
No one becomes addicted to alcohol overnight. You donâ t catch alcoholism the way you do the common cold.
Do I Have an Alcohol Problem? If you ve had two or three of these symptoms in the past year, thatâ s a mild alcohol use disorder.
If you ve had two or three of these symptoms in the past year, thatâ s a mild alcohol use disorder.
Painkillers and Opioid Use Disorder A national health crisis, 3 million people in the U.S. have opioid use disorder (OUD), or theyâ ve had it in the past.
A national health crisis, 3 million people in the U.S. have opioid use disorder (OUD), or theyâ ve had it in the past.
Opioid Abuse Statistics: Whoâ s Affected and Why? According to the National Center for Drug Abuse Statistics, 3.8 percent of American adults abuse opioids each year.
Opioid Abuse Statistics: Whoâ s Affected and Why?
According to the National Center for Drug Abuse Statistics, 3.8 percent of American adults abuse opioids each year.
Fentanyl: What You Need to Know Fentanyl is a human-made opioid used to treat severe pain. It s 50 to 100 times stronger than morphine.
Fentanyl is a human-made opioid used to treat severe pain. It s 50 to 100 times stronger than morphine.
Heroin Heroin is a drug that comes from a flower, the opium poppy, which usually grows in Mexico, Asia, and South America.
Heroin is a drug that comes from a flower, the opium poppy, which usually grows in Mexico, Asia, and South America.
What Is Marijuana Abuse? Marijuana misuse can have dire consequences if left untreated. Itâ s possible to misuse it and get addicted to it.
Marijuana misuse can have dire consequences if left untreated. Itâ s possible to misuse it and get addicted to it.
Recreational Marijuana FAQ Despite increasing acceptance, marijuana use does have some risks. Here s a look at how marijuana can affect your health.
Despite increasing acceptance, marijuana use does have some risks. Here s a look at how marijuana can affect your health.
How Pot Affects Your Mind and Body Marijuana has mind-altering compounds that affect both your brain and body. It can be addictive, and it may be harmful.
Marijuana has mind-altering compounds that affect both your brain and body. It can be addictive, and it may be harmful.
How to Avoid a High Tolerance to Cannabis Long-term use of cannabis can reduce the effects of its intoxication. So you can develop a tolerance for the drug.
How to Avoid a High Tolerance to Cannabis
Long-term use of cannabis can reduce the effects of its intoxication. So you can develop a tolerance for the drug.
What Is Prescription Drug Abuse? Prescription drug abuse is when you take a medication for a reason other than why the doctor prescribed it.
Prescription drug abuse is when you take a medication for a reason other than why the doctor prescribed it.
Prescription Addiction: Who s at Risk? Addiction is a complex disease brought on by many reasons, including your lifestyle and genes.
Addiction is a complex disease brought on by many reasons, including your lifestyle and genes.
Should You Worry About Your Back Pain Meds? Opioid meds do relieve back pain for short periods, but they re strong -- and they come with some serious risks.
Should You Worry About Your Back Pain Meds?
Opioid meds do relieve back pain for short periods, but they re strong -- and they come with some serious risks.
Dealing with Side Effects of Percocet Percocet is a mix of acetaminophen and oxycodone. Taking it doesn t come without side effects.
Percocet is a mix of acetaminophen and oxycodone. Taking it doesn t come without side effects.
Street Drugs: Know the Facts and Risks With street or club drugs use, youâ re taking risks. The drugs are dangerous, and thereâ s no way to know how strong they are.
With street or club drugs use, youâ re taking risks. The drugs are dangerous, and thereâ s no way to know how strong they are.
What Is Cocaine? Cocaine is a highly addictive drug that ups your levels of alertness, attention, and energy.
Cocaine is a highly addictive drug that ups your levels of alertness, attention, and energy.
Crystal Meth: What You Should Know Crystal meth is the common name for crystal methamphetamine, a strong and highly addictive drug.
Crystal meth is the common name for crystal methamphetamine, a strong and highly addictive drug.
What Are Poppers? â Poppersâ is a slang term for nitrites, a chemical sometimes used to treat heart conditions, when it s used recreationally.
â Poppersâ is a slang term for nitrites, a chemical sometimes used to treat heart conditions, when it s used recreationally.
Signs of a Sex Addict Sex addiction is defined as a lack of control over sexual thoughts, urges, and impulses.
Sex addiction is defined as a lack of control over sexual thoughts, urges, and impulses.
Porn Addiction Porn addiction is, in theory, when you canâ t stop looking at porn, even if you want to.
Porn addiction is, in theory, when you canâ t stop looking at porn, even if you want to.
What Is Overeaters Anonymous? Overeaters Anonymous are groups of individuals who come together to meet over a shared problem: compulsive overeating.
Overeaters Anonymous are groups of individuals who come together to meet over a shared problem: compulsive overeating.
Sign up for our free Good Health Newsletter
Suggested Reads about Substance Abuse and Addiction
Marijuana Abuse and Addiction Cannabis use disorder is when youâ re addicted to marijuana. Learn more about this condition and how to treat it.
Cannabis use disorder is when youâ re addicted to marijuana. Learn more about this condition and how to treat it.
What Does Alcohol Do to Your Body? A few seconds after your first sip, alcohol starts to change how your body works. After years of heavy drinking, those changes add up. Find out more from WebMD s slideshow.
A few seconds after your first sip, alcohol starts to change how your body works. After years of heavy drinking, those changes add up. Find out more from WebMD s slideshow.
Could You Be Hooked? Surprising Addictions Cell phones, social media, chocolate, a runner s high -- what is it you feel like you re addicted to? WebMD finds out why we feel we can t live without these things.
Could You Be Hooked? Surprising Addictions
Cell phones, social media, chocolate, a runner s high -- what is it you feel like you re addicted to? WebMD finds out why we feel we can t live without these things.
What Happens When You Quit Drinking? Whether you drink a lot or only once in a while, giving up alcohol may lead to changes in your body and mind. Find out what happens when you go dry.
Whether you drink a lot or only once in a while, giving up alcohol may lead to changes in your body and mind. Find out what happens when you go dry.
Top Search Terms for Substance Abuse and Addiction
You can also search by physician, practice, or hospital name