Pica Â is anÂ eating disorder marked by a persistent feeling or craving that causes you to eat things that have no nutritional value, such as dirt or paint. Most people with the condition have just one item that they continually eat, but some people eat many things.
Researchers and doctors donâ t understand what causes pica, but sometimes it could be caused by another medical problem, such as iron deficiencyÂ anemia or other nutritional deficiencies.
Itâ s hard to tell how many people live with pica, but some groups of people have higher rates of it.
In general, it seems that slightly over 1% of adults and up to 5% of children have pica behaviors. Some countries where there is food insecurity â people donâ t know when and where they may get food â can have higher rates of pica.
People with intellectual or developmental disorders may have higher rates of pica, up to 10% according to some studies.
Anyone can develop pica, but some people do seem to be at higher risk of getting it.
They include people who are pregnant or have:
Trichotillomania (hair pulling disorder)
Child neglect or other negative conditions
Thereâ s only one symptom of pica â craving and eating things that arenâ t food and have no nutritional value or benefit. This craving has to be present for at least one month.
Someone with pica can eat just about anything. Typically, itâ s only one item, but some people may have more than one preferred item. Although it can be just about anything, the most commonly consumed things include:
There is no test for pica, so the doctor makes the diagnosis based on the history â what the patient has been eating and for how long. These are some things a doctor considers when evaluating someone for pica:
The age of the person. For example, itâ s normal for young children to put objects in their mouth and sometimes swallow them. However, once a child passes this stage, itâ s no longer a developmental phase.
If there are intellectual or developmental delays that could cause the person to consume nonfood items.
Although there is no test for this particular condition, the doctor will likely order tests to see if eating these nonfoods has caused any harm.
Blood tests can show if there are electrolyte imbalances, anemia, lead (from paint), infections, and more.
Stool tests can show if there are parasites.
Imaging tests (such as X-rays) can show if there are any intestinal blockages.
There is no cure for pica, and there are no medications for it. The condition does go away in some people though. For example, when the condition appears during pregnancy , it often goes away after the baby is born. Children may grow out of it.Â
If the condition is caused due to something thatâ s missing from the diet, sometimes fixing this deficiency makes pica go away.
Some people respond to certain types of therapies, but if these donâ t work, then the only way to prevent someone from eating a nonfood item is to try to keep them away from it.
Three therapies that might be helpful are:
Mild aversive therapy. This method teaches people not to eat nonfood items by pairing them with a mildly unpleasant consequence while rewarding them if they eat something healthy.
Behavioral therapy. It changes how people behave by teaching coping mechanisms and strategies.
Differential reinforcement. This therapy teaches people to focus on other behaviors and activities so they avoid thinking of eating a nonfood item.
There are many potential complications of pica, such as:
Lead poisoning . Certain items, such as paint chips, may contain lead or other toxic substances. In children, this could lead toÂ learning disabilities Â andÂ brain damage .Â
Malnutrition. Eating nonfood objects can interfere with eating healthy food.
Blocked small or large intestine (gut). Eating objects that canâ t be digested, such as stones, can causeÂ constipation . Hard or sharp objects (such as paper clips or metal scraps) can tear the lining of the esophagus or intestines.
Infections. Bacteria or parasites from dirt or other objects can cause serious infections, some of which can damage theÂ kidneys Â orÂ liver .
Mouth or teeth injuries. Trying to chew hard items can cause cracks in the teeth or mouth injuries.
What Is the Outlook for People With Pica?
Pica usually begins in childhood and typically lasts just a few months although it could last a lifetime. Itâ s likely more difficult to manage in people who are developmentally disabled. They must be monitored for signs of complications if they get access to the nonfood item they crave.
If you have pica, you can do some things to help manage your condition:
Speak with your doctor or other health care provider. Pica is an eating disorder and canâ t be addressed if your doctor doesnâ t know about it. If you have other health issues, they could be related to the object or objects youâ re eating, so itâ s important to inform your doctor.
Go to your appointments. If youâ re having therapy to manage the condition, be sure to follow through and attend regularly. If you have a relapse and are once again eating nonfood items, your therapist has to know because this might mean your treatment plan needs to be changed.
Try to keep the nonfood items out of reach. Although you may have cravings, if the items you try to eat are hard to get to, you might be more successful in distracting yourself.
If you show any signs of complications, see your doctor as soon as possible. Because the complications are related to the things you consume, ask your doctor which complications and the signs and symptoms you should watch for.
Parenting a child with pica can be challenging. Here are some tips that might help you.
Speak to your childâ s doctor. Because pica can cause complications such as malnutrition, infections, and blockages in the gut, your childâ s doctor must know that these are possible problems. The doctor can do blood tests to check for nutritional deficiencies, stool tests to check for parasites, and X-rays to check for any blockages. If you know your child has nutritional deficiencies, you might be able to adjust their diet so they donâ t become malnourished. If your child eats something that could be high in lead, such as paint chips, they will have to be monitored for lead poisoning as well. If you ever have reason to believe that your child swallowed something harmful, get emergency care right away by calling 911 or Poison Control at (800) 222-1222.
Notify your childâ s dentist. Pica can cause dental problems, so their dentist can monitor for damage to the teeth or mouth.
Speak to teachers and other adults in your childâ s life. They should be aware of your childâ s condition so they can help supervise their behavior and, if possible, try to keep preferred nonfood items out of reach.
Try to keep the preferred object out of the home or out of reach. Itâ s not always possible, but if you can, try to keep the objects away from your child. For example, if they swallow pebbles, donâ t allow them to play in a yard that has pebbles. If they eat chalk, keep it out of the house.
Distract your child as much as possible. If your child is busy with access to objects they donâ t try to eat, they may have fewer cravings. Some experts recommend activities that keep their hands busy because if theyâ re using their hands in an activity, they canâ t use them to try to eat.
Educate your child about food and nonfood items. If itâ s possible, try to teach your child the differences between what can be safely eaten and nonfood items.
Work with a behavior specialist. A behavior therapist trained to work with children with pica may help both your child and you manage the condition.
There is no specific way to prevent pica. However, careful attention to eating habits and close supervision of children known to put things in their mouths may help catch the disorder before complications can occur.
Pica is an eating disorder that causes you to have cravings to eat nonfood items that have no nutritional benefit. People who are pregnant can develop it during pregnancy, but it generally goes away after birth. The condition can develop in childhood and can be challenging for parents. If your child has pica, itâ s important to speak with your doctor so your child can be watched for complications such as infections and malnutrition.
There is no cure for pica, but some people can manage it with therapy. People who develop pica during pregnancy often see it go away after they have the baby.
Pica can cause nutrient and mineral deficiencies, which can lead to malnutrition. Malnutrition can affect brain growth in children. Another issue is possible lead poisoning if the object is high in lead. Children exposed to high levels of lead can have brain damage, slow growth and development, and learning and behavior problems.
Pica isnâ t a part of dementia, but people with Alzheimerâ s disease or semantic dementia could develop the condition.
There are no medications that can treat pica.Â
Pica isnâ t necessarily linked to autism spectrum disorders, but people with autism could develop pica.
Pica is the craving to eat nonfood items, so no food will satisfy pica.