Porn addiction is, in theory, when you canâ t stop looking at porn, even if you want to. The obsession gets to the point that it interferes with work, relationships, and other parts of daily life. Itâ s easy to understand how this could be a problem given the widespread availability of internet porn today. In 2023, for example, the popular site PornHub reported more than 100 million daily visits.
Scientists are debating if heavy use of pornography is anÂ addiction Â in the medical sense of the word.
The World Health Organization added compulsive sexual behavior as a mental health disorder in 2018. Although it doesnâ t single out a pornography (or any other) addiction, it does refer to repetitive sexual activities becoming a central focus of a personâ s life to the point that they neglect their â health and personal care or other interests, activities, and responsibilities.â
A study of men who sought treatment for problematic pornography use (PPU) showed that their brains did respond to sexual images. This finding supports experts who say that the sameÂ brain Â activity shown in drug orÂ alcohol Â addiction â when circuits in your brain associated with reward, motivation, and memory get turned on â is also present in those who use pornography a lot.
But porn addiction isnâ t recognized in theÂ Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . Thatâ s the book doctors use to diagnose mental disorders.
And some study results dispute the idea that porn is related to addiction. One group of researchers found that watching porn didnâ t activate the parts of the brain usually involved with addiction; in fact, brain activity in those areas decreased.
Other scientists point out that studies so far have either been poorly organized or have struggled with defining what exactly would make this an actual addiction. Plus, some say itâ s difficult to get a handle on how widespread the problem is, partly because few users think the habit is a problem.
Even the American Association of Sexuality Educators, Counselors and Therapists agrees with this. The group says thereâ s little proof that either sex addiction or porn addiction are problems. In a position statement on the topic, the group cautions against making consensual sexual behavior a disorder.
Whether itâ s an addiction or not, those who use pornography regularly have intense urges or cravings for sex. They turn to porn when theyâ re anxious. They also tend to struggle at work and home. Some experts believe thereâ s a link between heavy use of porn and dissatisfaction withÂ relationships .
Definitions about how much porn is too much vary. But most experts agree that if it gets in the way of your day-to-day activities, you could be watching too much. Worrisome signs include:
Porn becomes a central part of your life. You stop doing things you really enjoy so that you can see more of it.
You become less interested in social encounters.
Youâ re looking at it or watching it in places that arenâ t appropriate, such as work or school.
Your sex life starts to be unfulfilling.
You canâ t stop looking at or watching porn, even when you try.
You canâ t quit even though you donâ t enjoy it as much.
Youâ ve been heavily looking at or watching porn for 6 months or more.
Because porn addiction is controversial in the medical/mental health community, thereâ s not a clear set of causes available. However, the causes of compulsive sexual behavior may offer some clues. Things that lead to porn addiction could include:
A brain chemical imbalance. Chemicals such as serotonin and norepinephrine control your moods. High levels are often tied to compulsive sexual behavior, like heavy porn use.
Brain pathway changes. If you do get addicted, it could change the way circuits in your brain work. An addiction means youâ ll have to view porn over and over again to get the same level of enjoyment.
Brain disease. Conditions such as epilepsy and dementia , as well as treatment for Parkinsonâ s with dopamine , can damage the part of your brain that controls sexual behavior.
Things that could make porn addition more likely include:
Ease of access. Thanks to the internet, access to porn is a click away.
Privacy. Viewing porn in private is easier than ever. Compulsive behaviors thrive in secrecy.
Compulsive sexual behavior such as porn addiction could also be more likely if you have:
Drug or alcohol use problems, or family members who have them
Other mental health issues, such as mood disorders (for example, depression ) or a gambling addiction
There is help if you feel your pornography habits are causing problems.
The main type of treatment for compulsive sexual behavior is psychotherapy. You could try:
Cognitive behavioralÂ therapy Â (CBT). This is a type ofÂ psychotherapy orÂ talk therapy . Youâ ll work with a mental health professional to identify problem areas in your life and learn ways to overcome them.
Acceptance and commitment therapy. This is a form of CBT that emphasizes accepting your thoughts and urges and committing to actions that are more in line with other values.
Psychodynamic psychotherapy. These treatments focus on becoming more aware of unconscious thoughts and behaviors, learning about your motivations, and resolving conflicts.
Medications can help control brain chemicals linked to obsessive thoughts and actions. They include:
Antidepressants. Drugs that treat depression, anxiety, or obsessive-compulsive disorder may help.
Naltrexone (Vivitrol) . This medication is used to treat alcohol and opiate dependence. It blocks the part of your brain that gets pleasure from addictive behaviors.
Mood stabilizers. Used for conditions such as bipolar disorder, these drugs may reduce compulsive sexual urges.
Anti-androgens. These medications dull the effects of male sex hormones (androgens). They reduce menâ s sexual urges.
You can also turn to self-help and support groups such as Sex Addicts Anonymous or Sexaholics Anonymous. In addition to having people who understand what youâ re going through, they can also point you toÂ mental health Â professionals trained in dealing with excessive porn use.
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Treatment Referral Helpline at 800-662-HELP (800-662-4357) can point you to professionals in your area who can help.
Not getting help for a porn addiction could lead to problems such as:
Mental health issues such as depression, anxiety, and suicidal thoughts
Job loss from watching internet porn at work
How to Help Someone With a Porn Addiction
To help someone with a porn addiction, you can look to advice on helping anyone with a mental health issue or addiction.Â
Education. It s hard to help someone when you don t understand their condition. You can read up on addiction and mental health issues to get a better awareness of the issues they are facing.Â
Talk. Let the other person know what you ve observed and how you believe it s affecting them -- and you. Try not to be judgmental. Keep lines of communication open.
Support. Tell them it s OK to seek help. Let them know you support their efforts.
Help with resources:. You can offer to help find resources for them and make appointments if they agree.
Self-care. You may want to talk to someone you trust about how the other person s porn habits affect you. You also might consider joining a support group.
A 2023 survey found that 73% of teens had seen online pornography, and more than half had seen it by age 13. By age 11, 15% of teens reported they d seen online pornography. Nearly half of the teens who had seen porn online went looking for it rather than seeing it accidentally. Of the teens who sought it out, 71% had viewed pornography in the last week.
Child health experts suggest taking these steps to help your child avoid developing an unhealthy relationship with porn:
Talk. It s an awkward subject, but experts say a direct approach is best. Tell your child you re aware that they may see porn online. Treat it the same way you would talk about sex, or drug and alcohol use.
Privacy and safety. Make sure children and teens understand how to stay safe online. They should know not to share personal information online. Tell them to alert you about any communication online that s intimidating or threatening.Â
Expectations. Many kids see porn before they ever become sexually active themselves. Porn can create unrealistic expectations. Let them know that pornography is acting. Talk to them about issues such as consent and safe sex.
When to worry. Is porn cutting into your child s time for schoolwork or social life? You may need to step in. If an older adult is showing your child porn, that s inappropriate and requires immediate attention.
Experts disagree about whether people can become addicted to porn in a medical sense â the way they get addicted to alcohol or drugs. However, if porn-watching habits interfere with daily life and relationships, it s an issue. If you or someone you know has a porn habit that s affecting daily life, therapy could help. Some medications, such as antidepressants , are prescribed in this situation. Support groups also are available. If you want to help someone with porn addiction, talk with them frankly about the issue and keep lines of communication open. You may want to offer to find porn addiction resources for them. If you re a parent, have an honest talk with your kids about online porn.
A porn-watching habit becomes a problem when it interferes with your daily life, when you want to stop but can t, when it affects your relationships, and when it causes problems for you at work or school. Mental health experts differ on whether porn actually meets the medical definition of addiction. But it may be part of compulsive sexual behavior.
There s no official definition of a porn addiction. Experts suggest you look instead at how watching porn affects your everyday life.
If you think you need help with your porn-watching habit, you may want to seek therapy. Some medications might be helpful, especially if you have an underlying mental health condition. You also might consider a support group.