What Is Eczema? Eczema is a group of conditions that make your skin inflamed or irritated. The most common type is atopic dermatitis.
Eczema is a group of conditions that make your skin inflamed or irritated. The most common type is atopic dermatitis.
Conditions That Can Look Like Eczema but Arenâ t Your dermatologist or allergist might tell you that you have one of these conditions that looks like eczema but isnâ t.
Conditions That Can Look Like Eczema but Arenâ t
Your dermatologist or allergist might tell you that you have one of these conditions that looks like eczema but isnâ t.
Infant Eczema 1 out of 10 infants and children have eczema, a dry, itchy rash that comes and goes.
1 out of 10 infants and children have eczema, a dry, itchy rash that comes and goes.
Eczema: Pediatric Atopic Dermatitis Pediatric atopic dermatitis (eczema) is a common skin condition that affects babies and children.
Pediatric atopic dermatitis (eczema) is a common skin condition that affects babies and children.
Eczema Symptoms Eczema is the name for a group of skin conditions. There are different symptoms for each type.
Eczema is the name for a group of skin conditions. There are different symptoms for each type.
Eczema vs. Dry Skin Dry skin is a trigger for eczema, which is also called atopic dermatitis. And eczema is one possible cause of dry skin.
Dry skin is a trigger for eczema, which is also called atopic dermatitis. And eczema is one possible cause of dry skin.
Atopic Dermatitis vs. Contact Dermatitis Atopic dermatitis and contact dermatitis can have similar symptoms, but different causes and triggers.
Atopic Dermatitis vs. Contact Dermatitis
Atopic dermatitis and contact dermatitis can have similar symptoms, but different causes and triggers.
What Is Weeping Eczema? Weeping eczema is a problem that stems from eczema where your skin oozes clear or straw-colored liquid.
Weeping eczema is a problem that stems from eczema where your skin oozes clear or straw-colored liquid.
Eczema Causes Doctors don t know exactly what causes eczema. The most common type, atopic dermatitis, resembles an allergy.
Doctors don t know exactly what causes eczema. The most common type, atopic dermatitis, resembles an allergy.
Conditions You May Have Along With Eczema People with eczema are also prone to certain other conditions.
Conditions You May Have Along With Eczema
People with eczema are also prone to certain other conditions.
Allergies and Eczema: Whatâ s the Link? The eczema rash on your skin can sometimes be linked with allergies, hay fever, and asthma.
Allergies and Eczema: Whatâ s the Link?
The eczema rash on your skin can sometimes be linked with allergies, hay fever, and asthma.
Hormones and Eczema: Whatâ s the Link? Hormones might be behind eczema symptoms that appear â out of nowhereâ or return after a long absence.
Hormones might be behind eczema symptoms that appear â out of nowhereâ or return after a long absence.
Types of Eczema Eczema comes in many forms. Here s a look at the types of eczema and their treatments.
Eczema comes in many forms. Here s a look at the types of eczema and their treatments.
Atopic Dermatitis Atopic dermatitis is the most common type of eczema. It makes you itchy and red, usually on your face, arms, and legs.
Atopic dermatitis is the most common type of eczema. It makes you itchy and red, usually on your face, arms, and legs.
Dyshidrotic Eczema Dyshidrotic eczema is a sudden rash of small, itchy blisters on your palms and along the sides of your fingers.
Dyshidrotic eczema is a sudden rash of small, itchy blisters on your palms and along the sides of your fingers.
What Is Neurodermatitis? Neurodermatitis, also called lichen simplex chronicus, is a common type of eczema.
Neurodermatitis, also called lichen simplex chronicus, is a common type of eczema.
How to Manage Eczema on the Face There are many kinds of eczema. Atopic eczema, seborrheic dermatitis, and contact dermatitis are often found on the face.
There are many kinds of eczema. Atopic eczema, seborrheic dermatitis, and contact dermatitis are often found on the face.
Eczema on Hands Your hands are prime targets for eczema triggers. Flares on your fingers can be itchy and painful.
Your hands are prime targets for eczema triggers. Flares on your fingers can be itchy and painful.
Eczema on Your Lips Eczema on your lips, or cheilitis, is when one or both of your lips and the surrounding skin will be inflamed or cracked.
Eczema on your lips, or cheilitis, is when one or both of your lips and the surrounding skin will be inflamed or cracked.
Ear Eczema Ear eczema is when you experience itchiness or dry skin around, on, or inside of your ear.
Ear eczema is when you experience itchiness or dry skin around, on, or inside of your ear.
How Is Eczema Diagnosed? Your eczema may cause a mild or severe itch. If you think you have eczema, make an appointment with your doctor.
Your eczema may cause a mild or severe itch. If you think you have eczema, make an appointment with your doctor.
Allergen-Specific Test and Atopic Dermatitis Around 30% of kids who have atopic dermatitis may test positive for a food allergy at some point.
Allergen-Specific Test and Atopic Dermatitis
Around 30% of kids who have atopic dermatitis may test positive for a food allergy at some point.
Eczema (Atopic Dermatitis) Treatment For mild eczema, home treatment might be all you need. If you have severe eczema, you may need to take medicine for it.
For mild eczema, home treatment might be all you need. If you have severe eczema, you may need to take medicine for it.
How Severe Is Your Eczema? Each type of eczema can range in severity from mild to severe. In serious cases, it inflames the skin all over your body.
Each type of eczema can range in severity from mild to severe. In serious cases, it inflames the skin all over your body.
Eczema: Whatâ s the Best Treatment for You? The right eczema treatment for you depends on your age, medical history, how bad your symptoms are, and other things.
Eczema: Whatâ s the Best Treatment for You?
The right eczema treatment for you depends on your age, medical history, how bad your symptoms are, and other things.
Treatment When Your Eczema Gets Worse Many people with eczema need to use more than one treatment, or try different types over time.
Many people with eczema need to use more than one treatment, or try different types over time.
Complications From Eczema Many eczema complications are related to itching. Eczema also causes skin changes that increase your risk of infections.
Many eczema complications are related to itching. Eczema also causes skin changes that increase your risk of infections.
Complications of Severe Eczema Severe eczema is more than skin deep. Complications can impact your day-to-day life, both physically and mentally.
Severe eczema is more than skin deep. Complications can impact your day-to-day life, both physically and mentally.
Special Care for Damaged and Broken Skin The best ways to relieve eczema damage and heal faster are to moisturize and take extra care to protect your skin.
Special Care for Damaged and Broken Skin
The best ways to relieve eczema damage and heal faster are to moisturize and take extra care to protect your skin.
What to Know About Eczema Infection Some external irritants may make your eczema worse and put you at an increased risk for infection.
Some external irritants may make your eczema worse and put you at an increased risk for infection.
How to Live Better With Eczema When you have a flare-up of eczema, you feel like youâ d do anything to calm down or prevent your rashes.
When you have a flare-up of eczema, you feel like youâ d do anything to calm down or prevent your rashes.
Self-Care for Eczema Many over-the-counter treatments offer relief from mild eczema, and may ease irritation, redness, itchiness, or rash.
Many over-the-counter treatments offer relief from mild eczema, and may ease irritation, redness, itchiness, or rash.
Cosmetics and Eczema: What to Choose You may already know that some cosmetics irritate your skin with eczema. That doesnâ t mean you have to give up on makeup.
You may already know that some cosmetics irritate your skin with eczema. That doesnâ t mean you have to give up on makeup.
Diet and Eczema Thereâ s no evidence that specific foods cause eczema or make symptoms flare.
Thereâ s no evidence that specific foods cause eczema or make symptoms flare.
Supplements for Eczema: What You Should Know You may need prescription medicine to keep your symptoms under control, but some people say they benefit from complementing their therapy with vitamins, herbs, and supplements.
Supplements for Eczema: What You Should Know
You may need prescription medicine to keep your symptoms under control, but some people say they benefit from complementing their therapy with vitamins, herbs, and supplements.
Living and Dealing With Eczema More than just dry, itchy skin, eczema may flare up when you re stressed or hot and bothered. Learn to control the symptoms of eczema.
More than just dry, itchy skin, eczema may flare up when you re stressed or hot and bothered. Learn to control the symptoms of eczema.
Can Prebiotics and Probiotics Help With Eczema? Can prebiotics and probiotics help with your eczema? Learn more about what these are and how they can affect conditions like eczema.
Can Prebiotics and Probiotics Help With Eczema?
Can prebiotics and probiotics help with your eczema? Learn more about what these are and how they can affect conditions like eczema.
Products You Should Use (or Avoid) for Eczema on Your Face If youâ re trying to make the most of your skin care routine while living with eczema, youâ re in luck. Here are the products to try and the ones to avoid.
Products You Should Use (or Avoid) for Eczema on Your Face
If youâ re trying to make the most of your skin care routine while living with eczema, youâ re in luck. Here are the products to try and the ones to avoid.
You can also search by physician, practice, or hospital name