Cold Sores Cold sores -- also called fever blisters -- are a painful infection caused by the herpes simplex virus (HSV).
Cold sores -- also called fever blisters -- are a painful infection caused by the herpes simplex virus (HSV).
Plantar Warts and Palmar Warts Plantar warts and palmar warts are common, especially in children. These warts are named for where they appear on the body.
Plantar warts and palmar warts are common, especially in children. These warts are named for where they appear on the body.
Blisters A single blister is usually the result of friction or a minor burn, typically on the hands or feet.
A single blister is usually the result of friction or a minor burn, typically on the hands or feet.
Chafing Chafing can occur anywhere on your body, but the thighs, groin, underarms, and nipples are particularly vulnerable.
Chafing can occur anywhere on your body, but the thighs, groin, underarms, and nipples are particularly vulnerable.
Psoriasis Psoriasis is a common skin disorder that produces thick red plaques covered with silvery scales.
Psoriasis is a common skin disorder that produces thick red plaques covered with silvery scales.
Rosacea Rosacea is a common disorder that mainly affects skin on the face. It causes redness on the nose, chin, cheeks, and forehead.
Rosacea is a common disorder that mainly affects skin on the face. It causes redness on the nose, chin, cheeks, and forehead.
Vitiligo Vitiligo is a condition in which white patches develop on the skin. Any location on the body can be affected.
Vitiligo is a condition in which white patches develop on the skin. Any location on the body can be affected.
Leprosy Leprosy is caused by a slow-growing type of bacteria called Mycobacteriumleprae ( M. leprae ).
Leprosy is caused by a slow-growing type of bacteria called Mycobacteriumleprae ( M. leprae ).
Carbuncles A carbuncle is a red, swollen, and painful cluster of boils that are connected to each other under the skin.
A carbuncle is a red, swollen, and painful cluster of boils that are connected to each other under the skin.
Staph Infection A staph infection often begins with a little cut, which gets infected with bacteria.
A staph infection often begins with a little cut, which gets infected with bacteria.
Cellulitis Cellulitis is a common infection of the skin and the soft tissues underneath.
Cellulitis is a common infection of the skin and the soft tissues underneath.
Red Birthmarks, Hemangiomas, and Your Skin Birthmarks are colored skin spots that either are present at birth or develop shortly after birth. They can be different colors.
Red Birthmarks, Hemangiomas, and Your Skin
Birthmarks are colored skin spots that either are present at birth or develop shortly after birth. They can be different colors.
Moles, Freckles, and Skin Tags There are many skin lesions that are common and benign. These include moles, freckles, skin tags, and many more.
There are many skin lesions that are common and benign. These include moles, freckles, skin tags, and many more.
Questions for Your Doctor About Chronic Spontaneous Urticaria Whether you re newly diagnosed with chronic spontaneous urticaria or are already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Questions for Your Doctor About Chronic Spontaneous Urticaria
Whether you re newly diagnosed with chronic spontaneous urticaria or are already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Sign up for our free Good Health Newsletter
Suggested Reads about Skin Problems and Treatments
Ringworm -- A Collection of Photos Ringworm is a common skin infection otherwise known as tinea. It is caused by a fungus. While there are multiple forms of ringworm, the most common affect the skin on the body (tinea corporis), the scalp (tinea capitis), the feet (tinea pedis, or athlete s foot), or the groin (tinea cruris, or jock itch).
Ringworm is a common skin infection otherwise known as tinea. It is caused by a fungus. While there are multiple forms of ringworm, the most common affect the skin on the body (tinea corporis), the scalp (tinea capitis), the feet (tinea pedis, or athlete s foot), or the groin (tinea cruris, or jock itch).
Why Am I Itchy? Itchy Skin Causes and Relief in Pictures Whether itâ s a mosquito bite or dry skin that wonâ t go away, we all have an itch to scratch occasionally. This WebMD slide show can help you find out what causes itchiness and how to fix it.
Why Am I Itchy? Itchy Skin Causes and Relief in Pictures
Whether itâ s a mosquito bite or dry skin that wonâ t go away, we all have an itch to scratch occasionally. This WebMD slide show can help you find out what causes itchiness and how to fix it.
What Makes You Sweat From exercise to fever, see the reasons you perspire. WebMD takes a look at stress, anger, sickness, and other things that make you sweat.
From exercise to fever, see the reasons you perspire. WebMD takes a look at stress, anger, sickness, and other things that make you sweat.
Collagen and Your Body Collagen is a protein your body makes naturally that s needed for joint health and skin health. Collagen supplements may reduce wrinkles and make skin look younger, but the science for this is still changing. Find out what you should know about collagen and supplements.
Collagen is a protein your body makes naturally that s needed for joint health and skin health. Collagen supplements may reduce wrinkles and make skin look younger, but the science for this is still changing. Find out what you should know about collagen and supplements.
You can also search by physician, practice, or hospital name