What Is Atrial Fibrillation? Atrial fibrillation, or AFib, is a quivery, fluttery heartbeat. You might also hear the doctor call it arrhythmia.
Atrial fibrillation, or AFib, is a quivery, fluttery heartbeat. You might also hear the doctor call it arrhythmia.
The Costs of Atrial Fibrillation (AFib) If you have AFib, treating it cuts your risk of having a stroke. But it can be costly, even if you have insurance.
If you have AFib, treating it cuts your risk of having a stroke. But it can be costly, even if you have insurance.
Latest Research on Atrial Fibrillation Today, researchers are still hard at work on finding ways to treat, manage, and prevent AFib and its complications.
Today, researchers are still hard at work on finding ways to treat, manage, and prevent AFib and its complications.
Which Type of Atrial Fibrillation Do You Have? AFib doesnâ t so much have types as it has durations. Doctors classify it by how long it lasts, or what causes it.
Which Type of Atrial Fibrillation Do You Have?
AFib doesnâ t so much have types as it has durations. Doctors classify it by how long it lasts, or what causes it.
Causes, Risk Factors, and Triggers The basic cause of AFib is disorganized signals that make your heart s two upper chambers squeeze very fast and out of sync.
The basic cause of AFib is disorganized signals that make your heart s two upper chambers squeeze very fast and out of sync.
AFib and Diabetes: Whatâ s the Link? Studies have found that both type 1 and type 2 diabetes likely raise your risk of developing AFib.
Studies have found that both type 1 and type 2 diabetes likely raise your risk of developing AFib.
What s the Link Between AFib and Thyroid Disease? If you have hyperthyroidism, you have a much higher chance of getting AFib. And the odds go up as you get older.
What s the Link Between AFib and Thyroid Disease?
If you have hyperthyroidism, you have a much higher chance of getting AFib. And the odds go up as you get older.
Does an Endocrine Disorder Raise Your AFib Risk? There are dozens of endocrine disorders, but a few are considered especially strong risk factors for AFib.
Does an Endocrine Disorder Raise Your AFib Risk?
There are dozens of endocrine disorders, but a few are considered especially strong risk factors for AFib.
What Are the Symptoms of Atrial Fibrillation? If your heart races rather than beats and the feeling lasts for a few minutes, thatâ s a sign you might have AFib.
What Are the Symptoms of Atrial Fibrillation?
If your heart races rather than beats and the feeling lasts for a few minutes, thatâ s a sign you might have AFib.
Atrial Fibrillation in Younger People AFib also affects younger people. It can even affect teens and children, although less frequently.
AFib also affects younger people. It can even affect teens and children, although less frequently.
Atrial Fibrillation in Older Adults Being older raises your chances for AFib. Older people are also more likely to have other conditions that raise AFib risk.
Being older raises your chances for AFib. Older people are also more likely to have other conditions that raise AFib risk.
Atrial Fibrillation in the Black American Population Youâ re less likely to get AFib if youâ re Asian, Black, or Hispanic in America than if youâ re white.
Atrial Fibrillation in the Black American Population
Youâ re less likely to get AFib if youâ re Asian, Black, or Hispanic in America than if youâ re white.
How Atrial Fibrillation Is Diagnosed AFib may or may not cause symptoms. Your doctor could find it during a regular physical.
AFib may or may not cause symptoms. Your doctor could find it during a regular physical.
Transesophageal Echocardiogram To help diagnose AFib, your doctor may use a transesophageal echocardiogram to see how blood flows through heart valves.
To help diagnose AFib, your doctor may use a transesophageal echocardiogram to see how blood flows through heart valves.
Newly Diagnosed With AFib: What to Know Studies show that people with AFib who understand their condition and what it means to them have fewer symptoms.
Studies show that people with AFib who understand their condition and what it means to them have fewer symptoms.
Your Atrial Fibrillation Medical Team If you have AFib, you ll need help keeping your heart in a normal rhythm. Various specialists will make up your AFib team.
If you have AFib, you ll need help keeping your heart in a normal rhythm. Various specialists will make up your AFib team.
What Are the Treatments for AFib? Treatments such as medications, nonsurgical procedures, and surgery can slow your heartbeat and bring it back into a normal rhythm.
Treatments such as medications, nonsurgical procedures, and surgery can slow your heartbeat and bring it back into a normal rhythm.
What Is HAS-BLED? Your HAS-BLED score tells the doctor how to manage your care. This way, everyone who has AFib is not treated the same way.
Your HAS-BLED score tells the doctor how to manage your care. This way, everyone who has AFib is not treated the same way.
Heart Rate Control for Atrial Fibrillation Heart rate control is a key way to manage atrial fibrillation. Doctors consider it one of the four pillars of AFib care.
Heart Rate Control for Atrial Fibrillation
Heart rate control is a key way to manage atrial fibrillation. Doctors consider it one of the four pillars of AFib care.
Rhythm Control Strategies for Atrial Fibrillation One way to control AFib is to take rhythm control medication, which helps your heart return to and stay in a normal rhythm.
Rhythm Control Strategies for Atrial Fibrillation
One way to control AFib is to take rhythm control medication, which helps your heart return to and stay in a normal rhythm.
Tips for Living With AFib Life with AFib has its challenges. But with the right treatment and lifestyle changes, you can stay active and energetic.
Life with AFib has its challenges. But with the right treatment and lifestyle changes, you can stay active and energetic.
How to Stop an AFib Episode You may be able to take some steps to help ease AFib symptoms when they start.
You may be able to take some steps to help ease AFib symptoms when they start.
Is Taking Supplements OK When You Have AFib? Talk to your doctor about supplements before you start taking them, to make sure you don t cause problems with your meds.
Is Taking Supplements OK When You Have AFib?
Talk to your doctor about supplements before you start taking them, to make sure you don t cause problems with your meds.
AFib: Why Weight Loss Helps If youâ re obese -- meaning you have a body mass index (BMI) of 30 or higher -- youâ re twice as likely to have AFib.
If youâ re obese -- meaning you have a body mass index (BMI) of 30 or higher -- youâ re twice as likely to have AFib.
Complications of Atrial Fibrillation AFib is a problem with your heartâ s rhythm. That can cause serious health complications.
AFib is a problem with your heartâ s rhythm. That can cause serious health complications.
When AFib Gets Worse Your AFib is likely getting worse If you notice your episodes are more frequent, last longer, or meds donâ t help as much.
Your AFib is likely getting worse If you notice your episodes are more frequent, last longer, or meds donâ t help as much.
AFib and Coronary Artery Disease: What s the Link? The connection and difference between atrial fibrillation and coronary artery disease can be confusing.
AFib and Coronary Artery Disease: What s the Link?
The connection and difference between atrial fibrillation and coronary artery disease can be confusing.
AFib and Stroke Some studies show that people who have AFib are about five times more likely to get a stroke than people who don t have it.
Some studies show that people who have AFib are about five times more likely to get a stroke than people who don t have it.
Sign up for our free Heart Health Newsletter
Suggested Reads about Atrial Fibrillation
Foods for Thought When You Have AFib Think twice before you eat or drink these foods to help keep your heart healthy.
Think twice before you eat or drink these foods to help keep your heart healthy.
A Visual Guide to Atrial Fibrillation See inside a heart during atrial fibrillation. WebMD shows the causes, tests, and treatments for this common heart rhythm problem through illustrations and photos.
See inside a heart during atrial fibrillation. WebMD shows the causes, tests, and treatments for this common heart rhythm problem through illustrations and photos.
Alternative Treatments for AFib Medication and surgery aren t the only things that can improve or prevent your AFib symptoms. Talk to your doctor about these ideas from WebMD to help treat your condition.
Medication and surgery aren t the only things that can improve or prevent your AFib symptoms. Talk to your doctor about these ideas from WebMD to help treat your condition.
How to Help Prevent an AFib Attack These simple things can make a flare-up of atrial fibrillation less likely.
These simple things can make a flare-up of atrial fibrillation less likely.
Top Search Terms for Atrial Fibrillation
You can also search by physician, practice, or hospital name