Living With Understanding Blood Sugar Diet Exercise Better Living Complications
Type 2 Diabetes Overview Symptoms Causes Diagnosis Tests Prevention Treatment Living Managing Complications Related Diseases
Type 1 Diabetes Overview Treating Managing Complications Related Conditions
You re more likely to have foot problems with diabetes because it can damage your nerves and lessen blood flow to your feet. The American Diabetes Association estimates that it s the reason 1 in 5 people with diabetes who seek hospital care do so. One of the best things you can do for your feet is to keep your blood sugar levels under control and to practice diabetic foot care.
If your blood sugar isn t well-controlled, you can also have poor or no feeling in your feet. You might not even realize you have a minor injury. Diabetes can also dry the skin on your feet and make your heels crack.
Small cuts or sores don t heal as well, and they can take longer to recover. The big risk is infection. Germs or fungus can get into small cuts or cracks.
You have to take care of your feet when you have diabetes. If you think you ve gotten an infection, tell your doctor right away. Early treatment can keep it from spreading. And that makes you more likely to avoid bigger problems.
Poor foot care may lead to amputation of a foot or leg.
Your doctor will check your feet each year for problems. If you take good care of your feet, you can prevent many serious problems related to diabetes.
Consider the following best practices for diabetic foot care.
Practice good diabetic foot care by keeping your feet clean. But donâ t soak them for a long time. This can dry your skin.
Pat your skin dry; do not rub. Thoroughly dry your feet.
After washing, put lotion or petroleum jelly on your feet to prevent cracking. But not between your toes -- this can lead to an infection. Sprinkle on a nonmedicated powder before putting on your socks and shoes to help keep your feet dry.
In winter, cold weather and central heating can dry your skin. Take extra care to moisturize your feet and keep them warm. Wear socks to bed if your feet get cold.
Look carefully at the tops and bottoms of your feet. Use a mirror or have someone else do it if you can t see them.
Set a specific time each day to do your foot check.
Use good light so you can spot any problems.
Check for dry, cracked skin on your feet, toes, and heels.
Look at your feet, toes, and heels for blisters , cuts, scratches, bruises, scrapes, or sores.
Check between your toes for cuts or fungus that might cause athleteâ s foot.
Check for redness, increased warmth, or tenderness when you touch an area.
Watch for ingrown toenails, corns, and calluses.
If you get a blister or sore from your shoes, don t pop it. Put a bandage over it, and wear a different pair of shoes.
Cut toenails after bathing, when they are soft. Trim them straight across, then smooth with a nail file. Avoid cutting into the corners of toes. Don t let the corners of your toenails grow into the skin. This could lead to an ingrown toenail .
You may want a nail technician or podiatrist (foot doctor) to do it for you. If you get pedicures at a nail salon, bring your own nail tools.
Don t cut cuticles. Donâ t use anything sharp to clean under your toenails or to remove calluses. You donâ t want to accidentally get a cut that could let an infection set in. You can use a pumice stone to gently smooth your heels after taking a shower or bath, but don t rub too harshly.
Exercise regularly to keep your blood flow healthy. Regular exercise may also help you lose weight. Aim to move your body for at least 30 minutes a day.
Walk and work out in comfortable shoes. Don t exercise if you have open sores on your feet. Exercise can also help prevent other things that lead to the foot sores and ulcers doctors call diabetic foot, such as:
Peripheral neuropathy , which affects nerves in the foot
Aerobic activities and resistance training are typically suggested for diabetes care. One long-term study found that low-intensity treadmill use four times a week can lower your risk of peripheral neuropathy.Â
Ask your doctor what type of activity is best for you.
Never go barefoot or only in socks. You donâ t want to step on rocks, tacks, or small pieces of glass that could cut your feet. Always protect your feet with shoes, hard-soled slippers, or similar footwear. Wear shoes/boots that will protect your feet from weather conditions like cold and moisture. Wear slippers at home.
Don t wear shoes with high heels and pointed toes. Take care of your feet by avoiding shoes that leave your toes or heels unprotected, like open-toed shoes, flip-flops, or sandals. They leave you vulnerable for injury and infections.
Change your socks daily. Wear natural fibers: cotton, wool, or a cotton-wool blend. Donâ t use socks with seams that might rub against your skin and cause blisters. Avoid tight socks.
Try on new footwear with the type of socks you usually wear. Don t wear new shoes for more than an hour at a time.
Look and feel inside your shoes before putting them on to make sure there s nothing irritating in them or rough areas.
Wear special shoes if your doctor recommends them. Replace your shoes when they show signs of wear, such as heels that are worn down on one side or a lining that is torn.
Avoid wearing shoes that are too tight or restrictive, as they can hinder circulation and slow wound healing when you have diabetes. Choose footwear that does not constrict your feet and without overly tight straps. If you have neuropathy ( nerve damage ), you may not notice that your shoes are too tight.
Stand on a piece of paper in bare feet. (Make sure you re standing and not sitting. Your foot changes shape.)
Put your shoe on and stand on another piece of paper.
The shoe should be at least 1/2 inch longer than your longest toe and as wide as your foot. Itâ s best to shop for shoes at the end of the day, when your feet are usually at their largest.
Shoes that are too tight or too loose may lead to blisters. Prevent diabetic foot and care for your feet with shoes that have:
Leather uppers without a seam inside, canvas, or suede. Look for a cushioned sole to absorb pressure. Pick shoes with laces over loafers because they provide better support.
Insides that are soft with no rough areas
Have at least two pairs of shoes so you can switch pairs when needed.
Well-fitting, quality shoes are necessary, but you also might want to think about wearing diabetic socks for foot care. Diabetic socks can:
All of these things help keep your feet healthy and injury-free.
Thereâ s no one standard for what makes a diabetic sock, but the best ones have qualities like:
Flat or no seams to prevent rubbing and blisters
Stretchy cuffs that donâ t constrict blood flow
Moisture-wicking materials to keep your feet dry
Softness, with extra thickness in the heel and ball of your foot
A light color to spot blood or other fluids that might signal injury or infection
A foot-conforming fit with no wrinkles or bunches
Don t wear stretch socks or socks made of nylon.
Get Help for Cuts, Bumps, Sores, and Burns
Don t wait to treat a minor foot problem if you have diabetes. Report foot injuries and infections right away. Follow your doctor s guidelines and first aid guidelines.
Don t self-treat your corns, calluses, or other foot problems. Go to your doctor or podiatrist to treat these conditions.
Check water temperature with your elbow or a thermometer, not your foot, to make sure itâ s not hot (over about 90 F). Don t wash your feet in hot water, which could cause burns.
Don t use a heating pad, water bottles, or electric blankets on your feet because they could cause burns.
Don t cross your legs or stand in one position for a long time. This can block blood flow to your feet.
Watch your blood sugar levels and follow your diet as your doctor directs. If you keep your blood sugar and weight under control, you may have fewer foot problems.
Donâ t smoke. Smoking can narrow your blood vessels and raise your chance of having foot problems.
Also, note any cuts, scratches, scrapes, blisters, corns, or calluses , even if they re small. Let your doctor or podiatrist know in case you need medical treatment.
Your doctor should look at your feet during each visit. Give them a call when you notice problems such as:
Athlete s foot (cracking between the toes)
Sores or wounds on your feet called ulcers. They often develop on the balls of your feet or the bottoms of your toes.
Calluses, warts, or corns. Donâ t try to treat them yourself with over-the-counter pads or liquids. Donâ t try to cut them off your skin. Ask your podiatrist or doctor to remove them safely.
Redness, swelling, or drainage that could be a sign of an infection.
Nails that seem thicker, yellow, changed in shape, striped, or not growing the way they usually do. This could be a sign of an injury or infection.
Hammertoes (when the middle joint of toes is permanently bent downward)
If your foot, ankle, or toe is swollen, red, hot to the touch, changed in shape or size, or hurts when you move it, you may have a sprain or fracture. Damage to your nerves can raise your chance of a serious condition called Charcot foot, which causes a change in the shape of the foot.
It s important to take care of your feet when you have diabetes. Diabetes affects your feet in several ways: You may have reduced blood flow to them, which impacts the healing of cuts or other wounds, or you could have nerve damage that keeps you from realizing you have a cut, wound, or infection on your feet. Consider these diabetic foot care tips: Checking your feet at home daily and with a doctor annually; wearing well-fitting, closed-toe shoes and socks made of breathable materials that don t hug or chafe your feet; and avoiding walking around barefoot (even at home). Keep your toenails trimmed and wash your feet every day, drying them well, especially between your toes.Â
What should people with diabetes avoid eating to prevent foot problems?
Your diet is an important part of diabetic foot care. Keeping your blood sugar in check can help you avoid damage to the nerves in your foot or keep nerve damage from getting worse. Eat a balanced diet that includes green and leafy vegetables like spinach, broccoli, and green beans. Limit refined sugars and grains in breads, pasta, and rice. Prepare and eat whole food, avoiding highly processed foods. Eat whole fruits as well as protein-, fat-, or fiber-rich carbohydrates.Â
Why is foot care important for people with diabetes?
Diabetic foot care is important to help foresee and treat any issues that may lead to ulcers or other problems with your feet. Nerve damage due to diabetes can make it harder for you to feel heat, cold, or pain in your limbs. When you have diabetes, your blood vessels can harden and narrow, resulting in poor circulation. Ignoring the problems diabetes can trigger with your feet can lead to serious complications such as gangrene (dead tissue) or loss of a limb. If you have diabetes, it s important to have your feet checked by a doctor or podiatrist at least once every year.
What are the signs of diabetic foot problems?
See your doctor immediately if you see signs of the following:
Changes to the color of the skin on your feet or changes to your toenailsÂ
How often should people with diabetes check their feet?
You should have a foot care routine for your diabetes. Check your feet daily, including between your toes and the bottom of your foot. Use a mirror or ask someone else to look.
What are the best shoes for diabetic feet?
The best shoes are those that fit properly. Check the inside of your shoes before wearing to make sure there isn t anything inside them that might injure your foot.
How to manage diabetic neuropathy in feet?
There s no cure for diabetic neuropathy. However, if you have it, you should focus on slowing it down, easing pain, and working to restore function. In consultation with your health care team, keep your blood sugar levels within your target range, make sure your blood pressure is under control, and maintain a healthy weight by getting regular exercise and eating a balanced diet. Your doctor can prescribe a number of medicines to treat diabetic nerve pain. You may also need to consult with medical specialists to help restore function and keep your neuropathy from progressing.Â