Skin Infections Bacterial Skin Infections Fungal Skin Infections Viral Skin Infections
Port-wine stains are birthmarks that look like someone spilled wine on the skin . About 3 out of every 1,000 children are born with this pink-to-reddish mark.
You ll see port-wine stains most often on faces, heads, arms, or legs. But they can appear anywhere on the body. These red marks are rarely harmful, and they usually aren t signs of any major health problem. The biggest concern is often whether a port-wine birthmark will upset a child or hurt their self-confidence, especially when they re a teenager.Â
Port-wine stains are a kind of vascular birthmark, meaning that they re related to the skin s blood vessels. These birthmarks, including port-wine stains, are not caused by anything the mother does or doesn t do before or during their pregnancy. You can t prevent them.
A port-wine stain happens when chemical signals in tiny blood vessels don t turn off, and those blood vessels get bigger. The extra blood turns the skin red. Researchers found that port-wine stains start with the mutation of one specific gene. What causes this change in a developing baby s DNA still isn t clear.
In about 3% of people who have a port wine stain on the face, this same mutation causes Sturge-Weber syndrome, a condition that affects the brain . People with this syndrome have seizures and eye problems . They may have weak muscles, migraines , and trouble learning.
Unlike some other birthmarks, such as a stork bite or strawberry, a port-wine stain grows as the child grows. The birthmark will last into adulthood. The color usually gets darker, turning purple or a deep red. The skin of a port-wine stain often gets thicker, and it may go from feeling smooth to pebbly.
The birthmark shouldn t itch or hurt, and it shouldn t bleed. If it does, you should have it checked by a doctor. Sometimes, a port-wine stain gets drier than the skin around it, and using moisturizer will help.
Port-wine stains around an eye or on an eyelid might cause glaucoma , which can lead to blindness.
Your doctor can check the birthmark during a regular visit and let you know if there could be any problems.
A port-wine stain, especially when it s large or on their face, might affect a kid s self-esteem. It might make others treat them differently, too. If you re concerned, ask your doctor about your options. For instance, laser treatments may help make port-wine stains smaller and lighter.
The main thing you can do is talk with your child. Help them prepare for other people s questions and reactions. Explain that their birthmark is just a part of their body, like the color of their eyes or how tall they are. It has nothing to do with the kind of person they are.