Tips for Caregivers of Loved Ones with IgA Nephropathy If youâ re caring for someone with IgA nephropathy, these tips can help you give your best and be your best for your loved one.
If youâ re caring for someone with IgA nephropathy, these tips can help you give your best and be your best for your loved one.
Side Effects to Prepare For From aHUS Treatment As with any medication, aHUS treatments can have side effects. Here are a few possible side effects you should know about.
As with any medication, aHUS treatments can have side effects. Here are a few possible side effects you should know about.
Tips for Caring for Yourself with PNH Learn the lifestyle tips you can follow to care for your physical and mental health when you have paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH).
Learn the lifestyle tips you can follow to care for your physical and mental health when you have paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH).
Things to Consider Before Buying Hearing Aids Need a device to help you hear? Consider these points before you buy a hearing aid.
Need a device to help you hear? Consider these points before you buy a hearing aid.
Tips for Eating Out With Hyperkalemia These tips can help you make low-potassium choices when youâ re dining out.
These tips can help you make low-potassium choices when youâ re dining out.
Bathroom Dangers: How to Spot Them and What to Do Bathrooms can be sweet retreats. But some dangers lurk, from slick floors to mold to iffy personal products. Learn how to spot an issue and what to do.
Bathrooms can be sweet retreats. But some dangers lurk, from slick floors to mold to iffy personal products. Learn how to spot an issue and what to do.
What Not to Do When You re Immunocompromised When you have a weakened immune system, it s best to avoid certain activities. Learn how to protect yourself.
When you have a weakened immune system, it s best to avoid certain activities. Learn how to protect yourself.
Strategies for Managing IgA Nephropathy Symptoms Through Diet What you eat can worsen or improve your symptoms. Hereâ s what you need to know.
What you eat can worsen or improve your symptoms. Hereâ s what you need to know.
Why Your Feet Are Always Cold and What to Do About It Cold feet could be nothing or a sign of a medical condition. Here are some common causes, along with tips for keeping your toes toasty.
Cold feet could be nothing or a sign of a medical condition. Here are some common causes, along with tips for keeping your toes toasty.
Emerging Trends in Health Technology Learn how doctors are using high-tech advances like artificial intelligence, virtual reality, and the Internet of Things (IoT).
Learn how doctors are using high-tech advances like artificial intelligence, virtual reality, and the Internet of Things (IoT).
The Home Safety Checks Youâ re Likely Not Doing You check your smoke alarms regularly. How about your door locks? Or trees? See some home safety checks you may not be doing, and how often to do them.
You check your smoke alarms regularly. How about your door locks? Or trees? See some home safety checks you may not be doing, and how often to do them.
Are These Habits Really Healthy? Are these practices really good for you, or are they urban legends? We show you whatâ s healthy and whatâ s hype.
Are these practices really good for you, or are they urban legends? We show you whatâ s healthy and whatâ s hype.
What Air Conditioning Does to Your Body Do you use air conditioning to stay cool in the heat? Hereâ s how it could be affecting your body.
Do you use air conditioning to stay cool in the heat? Hereâ s how it could be affecting your body.
Lifesaving Mnemonics to Know Youâ ve probably used a mnemonic devices to remember something before. Check out these mnemonic devices that just might save your life (or someone elseâ s) one day.
Youâ ve probably used a mnemonic devices to remember something before. Check out these mnemonic devices that just might save your life (or someone elseâ s) one day.
Tips for Taking Care of Yourself When You Have PNH There are plenty of things you need to do to keep yourself healthy if you have Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH). Learn more.
There are plenty of things you need to do to keep yourself healthy if you have Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH). Learn more.
Mistakes Even Healthy People Make Even if you consider yourself pretty healthy, you may be missing the mark in a few areas. Click through to learn some of the most common mistakes.
Even if you consider yourself pretty healthy, you may be missing the mark in a few areas. Click through to learn some of the most common mistakes.
Guide to Sickle Cell Disease This is a slideshow about sickle cell disease. Itâ s an inherited blood disorder that leads to a shortage of red blood cells. It can cause severe pain and raise your risk of infections and stroke.
This is a slideshow about sickle cell disease. Itâ s an inherited blood disorder that leads to a shortage of red blood cells. It can cause severe pain and raise your risk of infections and stroke.
Infections That Arenâ t Contagious Many infections are contagious. But some you wonâ t get from another person. You might pick them up from touching surfaces or by eating things that have bacteria or viruses in them.
Many infections are contagious. But some you wonâ t get from another person. You might pick them up from touching surfaces or by eating things that have bacteria or viruses in them.
Foods High in Potassium Your body needs potassium to run like it should. Find out what foods can help boost your levels.
Your body needs potassium to run like it should. Find out what foods can help boost your levels.
Reasons Your House Stinks Household odors can be embarrassing, and theyâ re sometimes harmful to your health. Here s how to get rid of bad smells.
Household odors can be embarrassing, and theyâ re sometimes harmful to your health. Here s how to get rid of bad smells.
How to Remove Stains and Sanitize We ve all had to clean a stain from time to time. When it happens again, use these tips to get things back to normal as soon as possible.
We ve all had to clean a stain from time to time. When it happens again, use these tips to get things back to normal as soon as possible.
Worms People Can Get Find out about the types of worms that humans can get, how it happens, and what the symptoms and treatments are.
Find out about the types of worms that humans can get, how it happens, and what the symptoms and treatments are.
Guide to Strep Throat Strep throat is an infection of your throat, and sometimes tonsils, that s caused by bacteria. Find out how you get a diagnosis, ways to treat it, and home remedies that can make you feel better.
Strep throat is an infection of your throat, and sometimes tonsils, that s caused by bacteria. Find out how you get a diagnosis, ways to treat it, and home remedies that can make you feel better.
Health and Cleaning Uses of Common Household Items Ketchup isnâ t just for fries. It can clean silver, too. Learn how to get more bang for your buck out of common household items.
Ketchup isnâ t just for fries. It can clean silver, too. Learn how to get more bang for your buck out of common household items.
Dos and Don ts of Cleaning with Bleach Bleach kills germs fast. But it can do more harm than good if youâ re not using it the right way. Hereâ s what you need to know.
Bleach kills germs fast. But it can do more harm than good if youâ re not using it the right way. Hereâ s what you need to know.
Guide to Blood Disorders Some blood disorders are forms of cancer. Others are benign. Find out what happens and why.
Some blood disorders are forms of cancer. Others are benign. Find out what happens and why.
How to Disinfect Your Laundry When Someoneâ s Sick If someone in your home is ill, sanitizing laundry is a key task. Learn the steps to clean and disinfect the sick personâ s clothing and linens while keeping the rest of the household healthy.
If someone in your home is ill, sanitizing laundry is a key task. Learn the steps to clean and disinfect the sick personâ s clothing and linens while keeping the rest of the household healthy.
Guide to Blood Donation Interested in giving blood? Your donation is needed more urgently than ever right now. Hereâ s what to know before you give.
Interested in giving blood? Your donation is needed more urgently than ever right now. Hereâ s what to know before you give.
Quick Home Remedies for Puffy Face and Body Under eye bags? Swollen ankles? Belly bloat? Here are some quick home remedies to tamp down swelling and puffiness.
Under eye bags? Swollen ankles? Belly bloat? Here are some quick home remedies to tamp down swelling and puffiness.
Benefits of Light Therapy Could light be the cure for what ails you? Find out how light therapy can help treat skin disorders, pain, depression, and more.
Could light be the cure for what ails you? Find out how light therapy can help treat skin disorders, pain, depression, and more.
Things That Can Affect the Smell of Your Pee Lots of things can change the way your pee smells. Find out what they are and what you can do about the odor.
Lots of things can change the way your pee smells. Find out what they are and what you can do about the odor.
Best Household Cleaners for Different Jobs Coronavirus. Soap scum. White water stains. Pink toilet rings. Your house is full of things to clean and to disinfect. Find out what works best.
Coronavirus. Soap scum. White water stains. Pink toilet rings. Your house is full of things to clean and to disinfect. Find out what works best.
Conditions That Can Cause Body Hair Loss Some kinds of body hair loss -- or extra growth -- can be a sign of another health condition. Find out what yours might mean.
Some kinds of body hair loss -- or extra growth -- can be a sign of another health condition. Find out what yours might mean.
Warning Signs of Kidney Problems Your kidneys are your body s clearinghouse for toxins. Learn what swollen feet, muscle cramps, and other warning signs may signal about your kidneys health.
Your kidneys are your body s clearinghouse for toxins. Learn what swollen feet, muscle cramps, and other warning signs may signal about your kidneys health.
How Your Blood Type Can Affect Your Health Does your blood type play a role in your risk for disease? Find out how it fares in the face of certain conditions.
Does your blood type play a role in your risk for disease? Find out how it fares in the face of certain conditions.
Whatâ s Lurking in Your Mattress? Itâ s probably been years since you bought a new mattress. Find out what might be lurking inside your bed, including dust mites, bedbugs, and bacteria.
Itâ s probably been years since you bought a new mattress. Find out what might be lurking inside your bed, including dust mites, bedbugs, and bacteria.
Living Your Best With ADPKD ADPKD, or autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease, can cause severe pain, headaches, and more problems. What can you do to feel better and stay active? Find exercise and diet tips, pain management approaches, and coping skills to help you live your best life.
ADPKD, or autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease, can cause severe pain, headaches, and more problems. What can you do to feel better and stay active? Find exercise and diet tips, pain management approaches, and coping skills to help you live your best life.
Why Are My Lymph Nodes Swollen? Everything from medication and infections to cancer can lead to swollen lymph nodes. Find out what mightâ ve triggered yours.
Everything from medication and infections to cancer can lead to swollen lymph nodes. Find out what mightâ ve triggered yours.
Mistakes Youâ re Making With Your Shoes (And How to Fix Them) Fashion often trumps function in the shoe world. Learn why itâ s a bad idea to shop for shoes online, how to find a good fit in the store, and how to fix other missteps with these hardworking accessories.
Fashion often trumps function in the shoe world. Learn why itâ s a bad idea to shop for shoes online, how to find a good fit in the store, and how to fix other missteps with these hardworking accessories.
Most Common Infectious Diseases in the U.S. In 2016, infectious diseases sent Americans to the doctor more than 15 million times. Thatâ s a lot of trouble for organisms you canâ t see but can catch through something as simple as a sneeze. According to the CDC, these are some of the most common infectious illnesses in the U.S.
In 2016, infectious diseases sent Americans to the doctor more than 15 million times. Thatâ s a lot of trouble for organisms you canâ t see but can catch through something as simple as a sneeze. According to the CDC, these are some of the most common infectious illnesses in the U.S.
Health Effects of Air Pollution Indoor and outdoor air pollution can cause a variety of problems, from asthma attacks to lung cancer to premature death. Learn more about how gases and particles in air pollution can affect your health.
Indoor and outdoor air pollution can cause a variety of problems, from asthma attacks to lung cancer to premature death. Learn more about how gases and particles in air pollution can affect your health.
What Happens When You Don t Wash Your Hands Washing your hands is critical to staying healthy and keeping from spreading germs to people around you. What happens when you forget? It s not good.
Washing your hands is critical to staying healthy and keeping from spreading germs to people around you. What happens when you forget? It s not good.
Whatâ s Hiding in Your Laundry? Your laundry habits may not get your clothes as clean as they could be. Find out the best practices to kill more germs in the wash.
Your laundry habits may not get your clothes as clean as they could be. Find out the best practices to kill more germs in the wash.
Common Showering and Bathing Mistakes How clean is your showerhead? Is the water the right temperature? Find out about little fixes that can make a big difference to your next shower or bath.
How clean is your showerhead? Is the water the right temperature? Find out about little fixes that can make a big difference to your next shower or bath.
How to Manage Common Household Emergencies You canâ t avoid household emergencies, but you can do things to keep you and your family safe when they happen. Find out more about how to handle some of these common situations.
You canâ t avoid household emergencies, but you can do things to keep you and your family safe when they happen. Find out more about how to handle some of these common situations.
Why Are My Hands and Feet Tingling? Do your hands and feet sometimes feel numb or prickly? Learn some of the common causes.
Do your hands and feet sometimes feel numb or prickly? Learn some of the common causes.
Health Risks of Common Pests Pests such as mice, rats, squirrels, raccoons, or bats in your home or yard can carry health risks. Learn the risks and how to get rid of the pest.
Pests such as mice, rats, squirrels, raccoons, or bats in your home or yard can carry health risks. Learn the risks and how to get rid of the pest.
Why Am I Always Thirsty? Do you always feel thirsty? Find out if thereâ s a medical reason behind your need for a long drink.
Do you always feel thirsty? Find out if thereâ s a medical reason behind your need for a long drink.
Health Benefits of Houseplants Houseplants that boost your mood, help you breathe easier, and keep away dust? Find out which indoor foliage can deliver health benefits.
Houseplants that boost your mood, help you breathe easier, and keep away dust? Find out which indoor foliage can deliver health benefits.