Skin Infections Bacterial Skin Infections Fungal Skin Infections Viral Skin Infections
There are many methods people use to remove ticks, from burning the tick with a hot match to smothering it in petroleum jelly or painting it with nail polish. But those methods arenâ t very effective.
To safely remove a tick, all you need is a pair of pointy, fine-tip tweezers and a good eye.
Before you dive in, youâ ll want to get:
Rubbing alcohol (If you donâ t have it, soap and water works, too.)
Pointy tweezers arenâ t the typical household tweezers that you use to pluck your eyebrows. You want pointy tips, not squared-off ones. Ticks can be as small as poppy seeds . If you use regular tweezers, you might tear them.
Once you have your tools, hereâ s what to do:
Clean the area around the tick bite with rubbing alcohol .
Get your tweezers right down on your skin so you can grab as close as possible to the tickâ s head.
Pull up slow and firm. Donâ t jerk or twist; a nice, steady pressure will do.
Clean the bite area and your hands again with rubbing alcohol or soap and water.
And thatâ s it. If the part of the head breaks off when you pull the tick out, thatâ s OK. You can try to remove it with tweezers, but if you canâ t, itâ s no problem. Your skin will heal and push out the leftover tick body parts over time.
If you donâ t have tweezers to remove the tick, you can carefully use your fingers. Try not to squeeze the tickâ s body when you do this.
If you need a better grip, you can use a loop of thread around the tickâ s jaws to help you pull it out. You can even use dental floss if you donâ t have any thread on hand. Once you secure the thread around the tick, pull directly up and out without twisting.
You have two options: Get it tested or get rid of it.
You may want to send the tick for testing to see if itâ s carrying diseases. But some major health organizations donâ t recommend this. If you send a tick to a lab to check if itâ s carrying diseases, know that the labs that test ticks donâ t use the same standards as a clinical diagnostic lab.
Plus, you shouldnâ t make decisions about your health based on the lab results. If the tick tests positive for diseases, it doesnâ t always mean youâ ll get those diseases. If the test results are negative, it doesnâ t mean youâ re in the clear. Chances are, if you get infected from a tick, youâ ll get symptoms before the tick lab results come back.
Itâ s best to watch yourself for symptoms and get treatment from your doctor instead of waiting for lab results.
If you just want it safely out of your life, you can:
Drown it in a container with rubbing alcoholÂ
Wrap it tightly in tape or put it in a sealed container, then throw it out
Donâ t crush it with your fingers. This is another way you can get disease from it.
Call your doctor if you have any symptoms of Lyme or other diseases carried by ticks, such as:
Make sure to tell your doctor that you had a tick bite, how long ago it happened, and where you might have gotten it.
If you get bitten by a tick, carefully remove the tick with tweezers, grabbing it as close to the skin as possible. Donâ t grab it by the body. Once you remove it, get rid of it by flushing it in a toilet or putting it in a sealed container to throw it away. Even though you can get ticks tested, some major health organizations donâ t recommend it, especially because the lab results canâ t tell you whether youâ re infected.
Call your doctor if you notice any symptoms of Lyme or other diseases carried by ticks.
Here are some of the most commonly asked questions about tick removal.Â
If you have a tick on you, you donâ t need to worry about killing it at once. The most important thing is to remove it with tweezers. But if you live in an area with lots of ticks, you can take steps to avoid tick bites . For example, you can use bug spray made for ticks and check yourself for ticks after being outside.
No, using petroleum jelly isnâ t a safe way to remove a tick. Some people think coating a tick in petroleum jelly will suffocate it. But covering it in this substance can actually make the tick stay embedded in your skin for longer. It can also make it harder to remove, as petroleum jelly is slippery.
There isnâ t a lot of evidence that salt or salt water can remove a tick. Drowning the tick in salt water may help kill it in the end, but it doesnâ t work every time.Â