What Is Psoriatic Arthritis? Psoriatic arthritis is an autoimmune condition. It happens when your bodyâ s immune system attacks healthy tissue by mistake.
Psoriatic arthritis is an autoimmune condition. It happens when your bodyâ s immune system attacks healthy tissue by mistake.
Psoriatic Arthritis Stages and Progression Psoriatic arthritis tends to advance in stages -- though the disease isnâ t officially â stagedâ the way cancer is.
Psoriatic Arthritis Stages and Progression
Psoriatic arthritis tends to advance in stages -- though the disease isnâ t officially â stagedâ the way cancer is.
What Makes Psoriatic Arthritis Worse? The triggers of psoriatic arthritis flares vary from person to person and can change over time.
The triggers of psoriatic arthritis flares vary from person to person and can change over time.
Itâ s PsA. Now What? A psoriatic arthritis diagnosis can be scary. With the right treatment and resources, you can live your best life.
A psoriatic arthritis diagnosis can be scary. With the right treatment and resources, you can live your best life.
Symptoms of Psoriatic Arthritis Some symptoms of PsA can be similar to rheumatoid arthritis, so your doctor may want to do tests to confirm a diagnosis.
Some symptoms of PsA can be similar to rheumatoid arthritis, so your doctor may want to do tests to confirm a diagnosis.
Psoriatic Arthritis Fatigue Studies show close to 80% of people with psoriatic arthritis have some degree of fatigue.
Studies show close to 80% of people with psoriatic arthritis have some degree of fatigue.
How to Prevent and Ease Psoriatic Arthritis Symptoms You can soothe your psoriatic arthritis symptoms with a combo of exercise, medicines, and other treatments.
How to Prevent and Ease Psoriatic Arthritis Symptoms
You can soothe your psoriatic arthritis symptoms with a combo of exercise, medicines, and other treatments.
What Is Pencil-In-Cup Sign? Pencil-in-cup sign is an abnormal change in one of the small hinge-like joints of your fingers or toes.
Pencil-in-cup sign is an abnormal change in one of the small hinge-like joints of your fingers or toes.
What Are the Causes of Psoriatic Arthritis? Doctors donâ t know what causes psoriatic arthritis. But there are risk factors that make you more likely to get it.
What Are the Causes of Psoriatic Arthritis?
Doctors donâ t know what causes psoriatic arthritis. But there are risk factors that make you more likely to get it.
The Link Between Psoriatic Arthritis and Psoriasis Not everyone who has psoriasis will get psoriatic arthritis, even though the conditions are often related.
The Link Between Psoriatic Arthritis and Psoriasis
Not everyone who has psoriasis will get psoriatic arthritis, even though the conditions are often related.
Psoriatic Arthritis and Gluten: Whatâ s the Link? Youâ ve probably heard some people with PsA say they have less joint pain when they take gluten out of their diet.
Psoriatic Arthritis and Gluten: Whatâ s the Link?
Youâ ve probably heard some people with PsA say they have less joint pain when they take gluten out of their diet.
How Hormones Affect Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis If you have psoriatic arthritis (PsA) or psoriasis, you may wonder what hormonal cycles mean for your joints and skin.
How Hormones Affect Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis
If you have psoriatic arthritis (PsA) or psoriasis, you may wonder what hormonal cycles mean for your joints and skin.
Psoriatic Arthritis Tests and Diagnosis An accurate and early diagnosis of psoriatic arthritis will help you avoid the damage and deformity it can cause.
An accurate and early diagnosis of psoriatic arthritis will help you avoid the damage and deformity it can cause.
CASPAR Criteria for Psoriatic Arthritis CASPAR is a set of rules that can help your doctor figure out if you have psoriatic arthritis.
CASPAR is a set of rules that can help your doctor figure out if you have psoriatic arthritis.
Conditions That Can Look Like PsA But Arenâ t Signs of PsA also may be signs of other diseases. A doctor can tell if the symptoms are caused by PsA or another condition.
Conditions That Can Look Like PsA But Arenâ t
Signs of PsA also may be signs of other diseases. A doctor can tell if the symptoms are caused by PsA or another condition.
Psoriatic Arthritis Treatment The main goal of psoriatic arthritis treatment is to control the inflammation that causes your joints to swell and ache.
The main goal of psoriatic arthritis treatment is to control the inflammation that causes your joints to swell and ache.
Treating Psoriatic Arthritis Using Otezla Otezla contains apremilast, a phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors approved for the treatment of active psoriatic arthritis in adults.
Treating Psoriatic Arthritis Using Otezla
Otezla contains apremilast, a phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors approved for the treatment of active psoriatic arthritis in adults.
Treating Advanced Psoriatic Arthritis When you have an advanced case of psoriatic arthritis, the condition may involve five or more of your joints.
When you have an advanced case of psoriatic arthritis, the condition may involve five or more of your joints.
Treatment for Dactylitis (Sausage Fingers) Dactylitis is a hallmark of psoriatic arthritis. It can also show how severe a case of psoriatic arthritis will be.
Treatment for Dactylitis (Sausage Fingers)
Dactylitis is a hallmark of psoriatic arthritis. It can also show how severe a case of psoriatic arthritis will be.
Managing Psoriatic Arthritis: Beyond Medication Whether or not you re taking medication for your psoriatic arthritis, you can try other things to help you feel better.
Managing Psoriatic Arthritis: Beyond Medication
Whether or not you re taking medication for your psoriatic arthritis, you can try other things to help you feel better.
The Cost of PsA Treatments, medications, and assistive devices can be pricey. If youâ re missing work, that lost income can add up, too.
Treatments, medications, and assistive devices can be pricey. If youâ re missing work, that lost income can add up, too.
How to Protect Joints With Psoriatic Arthritis The way you position and move your body while doing tasks may not only protect your joints but also help you save energy.
How to Protect Joints With Psoriatic Arthritis
The way you position and move your body while doing tasks may not only protect your joints but also help you save energy.
Nail Care and PsA Experts arenâ t sure why, but PsA usually affects your fingernails more than your toenails.
Experts arenâ t sure why, but PsA usually affects your fingernails more than your toenails.
Surprising Complications of Psoriatic Arthritis You might be surprised to learn that PsA can affect your health in other ways, too.
Surprising Complications of Psoriatic Arthritis
You might be surprised to learn that PsA can affect your health in other ways, too.
Health Conditions Linked to Psoriatic Arthritis People with psoriatic arthritis often have psoriasis. They tend to have or get a few other diseases, too.
Health Conditions Linked to Psoriatic Arthritis
People with psoriatic arthritis often have psoriasis. They tend to have or get a few other diseases, too.
Can Psoriatic Arthritis Cause Neurological Problems? If you have psoriatic arthritis, youâ re also at higher risk for neurological and psychiatric conditions.
Can Psoriatic Arthritis Cause Neurological Problems?
If you have psoriatic arthritis, youâ re also at higher risk for neurological and psychiatric conditions.
Psoriatic Arthritis and Sacroiliitis Axial psoriatic arthritis is the only type of psoriatic arthritis linked to sacroiliitis.
Axial psoriatic arthritis is the only type of psoriatic arthritis linked to sacroiliitis.
Sign up for our free Psoriasis Newsletter
Suggested Reads about Psoriatic Arthritis
Peer Support Helps Manage Psoriatic Arthritis Joel Nelson escaped into a fantasy world of video games while he shouldered a heavy burden. Level by level, he built a community for those with PsA.
Peer Support Helps Manage Psoriatic Arthritis
Joel Nelson escaped into a fantasy world of video games while he shouldered a heavy burden. Level by level, he built a community for those with PsA.
Manage Pain With Psoriatic Arthritis â My pain doesn t really change,â Joel Nelson says. â It s my ability to cope with it that does.â Hereâ s how he handles the daily exhaustion of PsA.
â My pain doesn t really change,â Joel Nelson says. â It s my ability to cope with it that does.â Hereâ s how he handles the daily exhaustion of PsA.
Parenting With Psoriatic Arthritis An honest account of what parenting is like with PsA. Kids donâ t care about your condition, Joel Nelson says, they just want your attention.
An honest account of what parenting is like with PsA. Kids donâ t care about your condition, Joel Nelson says, they just want your attention.
Resuming Life After a Painful Bout With Psoriatic Arthritis Instead of hiking and painting, Marissa Nicole was confined to her bed. How did she crush the pain of PsA and build her stamina to once again find joy?
Resuming Life After a Painful Bout With Psoriatic Arthritis
Instead of hiking and painting, Marissa Nicole was confined to her bed. How did she crush the pain of PsA and build her stamina to once again find joy?
Top Search Terms for Psoriatic Arthritis
You can also search by physician, practice, or hospital name