What Is Cancer? Cancer starts when a cell is somehow altered so that it multiplies out of control.
Cancer starts when a cell is somehow altered so that it multiplies out of control.
Is There a Cure for Cancer? Thereâ s no cure for it, but there are treatments that may be able to cure some people of some cancers.
Thereâ s no cure for it, but there are treatments that may be able to cure some people of some cancers.
Cancer Incidence by Age Youâ re more likely to get cancer as you get older. In fact, age is the biggest risk factor for the disease.
Youâ re more likely to get cancer as you get older. In fact, age is the biggest risk factor for the disease.
Common Carcinogens A carcinogen is something that can cause you to have cancer.
A carcinogen is something that can cause you to have cancer.
Smoking and Cancer Smoking cigarettes causes about 3 out of every 10 cancer deaths in the U.S.
Smoking cigarettes causes about 3 out of every 10 cancer deaths in the U.S.
Alcohol and Cancer Researchers found that drinking alcohol causes chemical and other physical changes in our bodies that make cancers more likely.
Researchers found that drinking alcohol causes chemical and other physical changes in our bodies that make cancers more likely.
Viruses That Can Lead to Cancer You might be surprised to learn that some viruses can lead to cancer.
You might be surprised to learn that some viruses can lead to cancer.
Early Signs of Cancer Pay attention to your body. Play it smart when you notice anything that could be a serious health problem, like cancer.
Pay attention to your body. Play it smart when you notice anything that could be a serious health problem, like cancer.
Cancer Symptoms Women Ignore Itâ s a good idea to get any new symptoms checked out by your doctor. Some changes could be signs of cancer.
Itâ s a good idea to get any new symptoms checked out by your doctor. Some changes could be signs of cancer.
Common Cancers and How to Spot Them Most people know of someone in their family who has been diagnosed with cancer. So itâ s helpful to know cancer warning signs.
Most people know of someone in their family who has been diagnosed with cancer. So itâ s helpful to know cancer warning signs.
Cancers That Metastasize to the Bones Bones, lungs, and the liver are the most common places for cancer cells to spread, or metastasize.
Bones, lungs, and the liver are the most common places for cancer cells to spread, or metastasize.
Cancer Diagnosis Some types of cancer may be detected by routine self-exam or other screening measures before the symptoms become serious.
Some types of cancer may be detected by routine self-exam or other screening measures before the symptoms become serious.
Cancer Diagnosis Without Biopsy You can find certain types of cancer without a biopsy. There are a few different ways to do this.
You can find certain types of cancer without a biopsy. There are a few different ways to do this.
Lymph Node Biopsy If your doctor says you should get a lymph node biopsy, it s because they need to check for signs of disease, such as cancer.
If your doctor says you should get a lymph node biopsy, it s because they need to check for signs of disease, such as cancer.
Bone Biopsy A bone biopsy is a test that takes a sample of tissue or cells from your bone to check for cancer or other bone diseases.
A bone biopsy is a test that takes a sample of tissue or cells from your bone to check for cancer or other bone diseases.
Cancer Specialists Most cancers are complex to treat, so you may need to see several different cancer specialists during your treatment.
Most cancers are complex to treat, so you may need to see several different cancer specialists during your treatment.
What Is Medical Oncology? Medical oncology is a type of medicine that focuses on the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of cancer.
Medical oncology is a type of medicine that focuses on the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of cancer.
What Is a Radiation Oncologist? Radiation oncologists work with oncologists, surgeons, and other doctors to determine an appropriate course of treatment.
Radiation oncologists work with oncologists, surgeons, and other doctors to determine an appropriate course of treatment.
What Is Surgical Oncology? Surgical oncology is a field of medicine that uses surgery to treat cancer. Its goal is to find tumors and remove them.
Surgical oncology is a field of medicine that uses surgery to treat cancer. Its goal is to find tumors and remove them.
Cancer Treatment: What Are the Options? You and your doctor will decide what treatment is best based on the type of cancer, where it is, and how far it has spread.
You and your doctor will decide what treatment is best based on the type of cancer, where it is, and how far it has spread.
Cancer Surgery If you have cancer, you may have surgery at some point. Sometimes, it can completely treat the disease.
If you have cancer, you may have surgery at some point. Sometimes, it can completely treat the disease.
Nuclear Medicine Nuclear medicine can help diagnose and treat different conditions, including some forms of cancer.
Nuclear medicine can help diagnose and treat different conditions, including some forms of cancer.
New Ideas in Cancer Treatment A lot has happened in recent years to transform how cancer is, and will be, treated.
A lot has happened in recent years to transform how cancer is, and will be, treated.
Natural Help for Treatment Side Effects Cancer treatments like chemotherapy and radiation may save your life. But they can also cause unwelcome side effects.
Cancer treatments like chemotherapy and radiation may save your life. But they can also cause unwelcome side effects.
Exercise During Cancer Treatment Recent research suggests that exercise is not only safe, but helpful during your cancer treatment.
Recent research suggests that exercise is not only safe, but helpful during your cancer treatment.
What Medicines Help Treat Cancer Pain? When cancer causes you physical pain, there are many medicines that can help manage it so you feel better.
When cancer causes you physical pain, there are many medicines that can help manage it so you feel better.
Ways Dogs Ease Cancer Treatment Therapy dogs can bring comfort to people being treated for cancer, and they may help them get better, too.
Therapy dogs can bring comfort to people being treated for cancer, and they may help them get better, too.
Tips for Living a Longer, Fuller Life With Cancer Thereâ s plenty you can do every day to not only survive cancer, but to feel better and live as well as you can.
Tips for Living a Longer, Fuller Life With Cancer
Thereâ s plenty you can do every day to not only survive cancer, but to feel better and live as well as you can.
Intimacy After Cancer After cancer treatment, your sex life may be a little different than it used to be.
After cancer treatment, your sex life may be a little different than it used to be.
Cancer and Diet What you eat is really important when you have cancer. Your body needs enough calories and nutrients to stay strong.
What you eat is really important when you have cancer. Your body needs enough calories and nutrients to stay strong.
Fruits to Eat When You Have Cancer While going through cancer treatment or trying to keep cancer from coming back, some fruits may be better than others.
While going through cancer treatment or trying to keep cancer from coming back, some fruits may be better than others.
What Does Remission Mean? When you hear that cancer is in remission, is that the same as cured? It isnâ t, but remission is still great news.
When you hear that cancer is in remission, is that the same as cured? It isnâ t, but remission is still great news.
Cancer Recurrence Sometimes, cancer can come back after you ve had treatment. This is what doctors call a recurrence.
Sometimes, cancer can come back after you ve had treatment. This is what doctors call a recurrence.
How to Tell Your Family and Friends You Have Cancer If youâ ve been diagnosed with cancer, you might be wondering when and how to break the news to your friends and family.
How to Tell Your Family and Friends You Have Cancer
If youâ ve been diagnosed with cancer, you might be wondering when and how to break the news to your friends and family.
Hiring a Cancer Caregiver Zero in on any gaps in care. Talk with your health care team to figure out where you might need extra support.
Zero in on any gaps in care. Talk with your health care team to figure out where you might need extra support.
Cancer Caregiver s Checklist While caring for someone with cancer, you want them know you re there to help. Use this checklist to make daily care easier.
While caring for someone with cancer, you want them know you re there to help. Use this checklist to make daily care easier.
How Health Care Reform Affects Your Cancer Care If you have cancer, the Affordable Care Act gives you protection against losing insurance coverage.
How Health Care Reform Affects Your Cancer Care
If you have cancer, the Affordable Care Act gives you protection against losing insurance coverage.
Questions for Your Doctor About Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Whether you re newly diagnosed with CLL or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Questions for Your Doctor About Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
Whether you re newly diagnosed with CLL or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Questions for Your Doctor About Polycythemia Vera Whether you re newly diagnosed with this blood cancer or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Questions for Your Doctor About Polycythemia Vera
Whether you re newly diagnosed with this blood cancer or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Questions for Your Doctor About Myelodysplastic Syndromes Whether you re newly diagnosed with MDS or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Questions for Your Doctor About Myelodysplastic Syndromes
Whether you re newly diagnosed with MDS or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Questions for Your Doctor About Myelofibrosis Whether you re newly diagnosed with myelofibrosis or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Questions for Your Doctor About Myelofibrosis
Whether you re newly diagnosed with myelofibrosis or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
10 Things You Never Knew Could Cause Lung Cancer Smoking isnâ t the only thing that leads to lung cancer. Click through WebMD s slide show to check out some causes you probably donâ t know about.
10 Things You Never Knew Could Cause Lung Cancer
Smoking isnâ t the only thing that leads to lung cancer. Click through WebMD s slide show to check out some causes you probably donâ t know about.
Guide to Bone Cancer Find out more from WebMD about this type of cancer, which happens more often in children and young adults whose bones are still growing.
Find out more from WebMD about this type of cancer, which happens more often in children and young adults whose bones are still growing.
15 Cancer Symptoms to Know From lumps and redness to weight loss and fatigue, WebMD shows you possible cancer symptoms, what these signs might mean, and when it could be time to call your doctor.
From lumps and redness to weight loss and fatigue, WebMD shows you possible cancer symptoms, what these signs might mean, and when it could be time to call your doctor.
Palliative and Supportive Care Tips for Your Myelofibrosis Learn how palliative care for myelofibrosis can help you manage symptoms and give you emotional support for a better quality of life.
Palliative and Supportive Care Tips for Your Myelofibrosis
Learn how palliative care for myelofibrosis can help you manage symptoms and give you emotional support for a better quality of life.
You can also search by physician, practice, or hospital name