Skin Infections Bacterial Skin Infections Fungal Skin Infections Viral Skin Infections
If you have itchy, red, or pus-filled little bumps on your skin, you may have folliculitis.
Folliculitis is a common skin problem that affects hair follicles, the tiny pockets around the hairs on your skin. It can look like a small pimple or a crusty sore.
In most cases, folliculitis is benign and usually goes away on its own without treatment.
But sometimes it can get worse, especially if you have a weakened immune system. In those cases, there are several treatments available. If it worsens or is left untreated, folliculitis can lead to a severe infection, hair loss, scarring, or other problems.
Folliculitis happens when a hair follicle becomes infected or inflamed by bacteria, fungus, or a blockage. Depending on where it occurs, folliculitis may have a more common name, such as:
Barberâ s itch, if it shows up on your face where your beard or mustache grows
Razor bumps or shaving rash, which is similar to barberâ s itch
Hot tub rash, which is caused by bacteria in warm or hot water
Folliculitis is common and can affect anyone: adults, children, and even babies.
Some groups of people are more likely to get certain types of folliculitis. If you have a beard that you trim often, youâ re at risk for inflamed skin on your chin and cheeks. You are also more likely to have folliculitis if you have a high body weight, live with diabetes, take antibiotics for a long time, or have a weak or suppressed immune system .
Most of the time, folliculitis doesnâ t spread from person to person. But there are a few exceptions. If your folliculitis is caused by a germ that lives naturally in water or soil, it could infect other people, too. If you get a rash after sitting in a hot tub, other people who sat in the tub may also get it.
Some folliculitis is caused by a contagious type of bacteria calledÂ staphylococcus, or staph. If you have a cut on your skin and touch something such as a towel that has the germ on it, you may get infected. If so, youâ ll be contagious until youâ ve been treated with antibiotics for at least 48 hours.
If any of your hair follicles contain pus, wash your hands for 20-30 seconds after touching the infected area. Until itâ s healed, donâ t share clothes orÂ towels with others.
Your symptoms will vary based on the type of folliculitis you have and how bad it is.
Groups of small bumps, such as pimples, some with whiteheads on them
Blisters that break open, ooze, and become crusty
Large areas of swollen skin that may leak pus
These areas of your skin may be itchy, tender, and painful.
There are two main types of folliculitis:
Superficial folliculitis is when only part of the hair follicle is damaged.
Deep folliculitis is when the whole follicle is damaged.
Within these two categories, there are several subtypes:
Itâ s the most common form of folliculitis and causes itchy red or white bumps filled with pus. The bacteria can enter a hair follicle if you cut yourself. It usually goes away on its own, but if it is severe and persists, you may need to see a doctor.
Pseudomonas folliculitis, or â hot tub folliculitisâ
This is caused by bacteria that live in heated water that moves quickly, as in a hot tub, water slide, or whirlpool. If you get it, it appears a couple of days after your exposure. It may look like staphylococcal folliculitis or like a rash, particularly in areas under your swimsuit. It usually resolves on its own. If it doesnâ t, youâ ll need a doctor for treatment.
Malassezia is a type of yeast naturally found on your skin. If too much of it grows, it can get into your hair follicles and make your skin itchy. Youâ re more likely to have this type if your skin is oily, you have dandruff, or you sweat a lot.Â Anti-dandruff shampoo can help if you use it on affected skin daily.
Pseudofolliculitis barbae, or â razor bumpsâ
This usually occurs in areas where you trim hair, such as the bikini area or the face. It happens when hairs become ingrown after shaving or waxing, leading to dark bumps called keloids. If it gets worse and is left untreated, it can leave scars. It is more common in people with curly hair and in Black, Asian, and Asian American men.
ThisÂ is a more serious form of folliculitis caused by shaving. It looks like large pus-filled bumps. If you get this, you should stop shaving and see a doctor for treatment. If not treated, it can cause scarring.
This is caused by a yeast infection. It leads to itchy, pus-filled pimples that show up on your upper body, mostly on your back and chest, but also on your neck, shoulders, arms, and face.
This is a rare type of scalp folliculitis. If bacteria inflame your hair follicles for a long time, your immune system may attack them, leading to hair loss. Doctors arenâ t sure what causes this type.
This condition affects babies and people whose immune systems donâ t work properly. It causes itchy, pus-filled bumps usually on the shoulders, upper arms, neck, and forehead. It goes away on its own in most cases.
This shows up if you use antibiotics for acne over a long period, which can cause bacteria to become resistant to the drug. It can worsen your acne. If you get it, you should see your dermatologist or other doctor.
A boil is a bump that can be red, tender, and painful. It happens when a follicle becomes seriously infected. It can leave a scar. A carbuncle is a cluster of several boils. You may need to see a doctor for drugs or other treatments to take care of them.
Because you have hair follicles all over your body, you can get folliculitis almost anywhere. But youâ re more likely to have it in the following places.
Itâ s rare, but hair follicles on your head can become infected or inflamed. It can cause round or oval bald spots. Your scalp may also itch, feel tight, or hurt.
If you shave, you can develop â razor bumpsâ on your cheeks, chin, and neck. If they get infected, these small spots can grow and fill with pus. Folliculitis can also show up on other parts of your face, such as your forehead. Thatâ s often because a hair follicle has become blocked with bacteria.
What might look like acne in these areas could be a type of folliculitis. You may itch and notice that sweat worsens the bumps. This type of folliculitis is common in teens because puberty makes oil glands start working harder.
If your immune system is weak, you could see another type of folliculitis on your chest, neck, and arms. The bumps may clear up for a while, then come back. Babies often get folliculitis on their chest and back.
You can get folliculitis â down thereâ because of waxing, shaving, or plucking. Wearing clothing that rubs against your skin can also lead to painful pimples in your underwear area.
Small bumps, which may have pus, can appear on your legs, especially your thighs. They may itch or hurt.
You can get folliculitis on your rear end if you wear tight clothes or use wax to remove hair. Sometimes, it may show up as a single, red pimple. Or it could appear as a widespread rash.
Most of the time, folliculitis goes away with a little self-care at home. But see your doctor if you have any of the following.
A rash that clears up but keeps coming back
Your doctor can usually tell if you have folliculitis by looking at your skin closely and asking questions about your medical history.Â
You donâ t usually need tests unless treatments donâ t work. In that case, your doctor may:
Use a swab to take a culture from one of your sores so a lab can determine whatâ s causing the infection
Scrape your skin and send the sample to a lab to be checked for yeast
In rare cases, do a biopsy to rule out more serious issues
How to Take Care of Folliculitis at Home
Mild folliculitis can go away without medical treatment.
To help yourself heal and ease symptoms, you can:
Clean the infected area. Wash twice a day with warm water and antibacterial soap. Be sure to use a fresh cloth and towel each time.
Use salt. Put one teaspoon of table salt in two cups of warm water, soak a washcloth in it, and place the cloth on your skin. You can also try this with a solution of warm water and white vinegar.
Try gels, creams, and washes. Rub over-the-counter antibiotics on your skin. If youâ re itchy, you can apply oatmeal lotion or hydrocortisone cream. It also helps to avoid shaving, scratching, and wearing tight or rough clothes on the infected area.Â
Apply warm compresses. Try moist heat on the area three to four times a day for 15-20 minutes each time.
To keep folliculitis from coming back, you can:
Change your habits. Stop doing whatever may have inflamed your hair follicles. For instance, you may need to stopÂ plucking, using a hot tub, or wearing your favorite leggings for a while.
Try not to scratch. Although the area may be itchy, scratching could open up the follicle and either cause or worsen an infection.
Donâ t squeeze, pop, or cut open bumps. This can spread infection.
What Are Treatment Options for Folliculitis?
Your doctor may give you drugs or other treatments if you have severe folliculitis. Most cases can be treated with an antibiotic, antifungal, or antiparasitic drug, depending on the type of folliculitis you have.
Your doctor will also advise you on how to care for your folliculitis and how to avoid making it worse or spreading it. You may be told to apply warm compresses, avoid scratching, and not to shave the affected skin.
If you have bacterial folliculitis, your doctor may prescribe antibiotic lotions or gels. If itâ s serious or keeps coming back, they may give you antibiotic pills to fight the bacterial infection.Â
If you have fungal folliculitis, your doctor may prescribe antifungal shampoos, creams, or pills.
For eosinophilic folliculitis, your doctor may recommend a steroid cream to help with itching.
In severe cases, your doctor may make a small cut in an infected follicle to help it drain and heal.
If you have razor bumps that havenâ t responded to treatment, your doctor may advise using laser hair removal treatments instead of shaving. Youâ ll probably need several treatments over a period of time.Â
How long does it take folliculitis to go away?
How long it takes your skin to clear up will depend on the type of folliculitis you have and the steps you and your doctor take to treat it.Â If itâ s a simple case, your skin should start to improve in 7-10 days.
Sometimes, folliculitis can be more stubborn and take longer to clear up. This happens if youâ re not sure whatâ s causing it. It might not respond right away to a certain type of medicine,Â or it might go away and come back.Â In some cases, it may take a few months before your skin is back to normal.
What Are the Complications of Folliculitis?
Most of the time, folliculitis clears up without any issues. But sometimes, longer-term problems can crop up.Â
You might have scarring once your skin clears up. Or you could notice that the skin in the affected area is lighter or darker than your usual skin tone. Depending on the cause of your folliculitis, you could also lose hair that doesnâ t grow back.
Folliculitis thatâ s due to an infection sometimes clears up, then returns. It can also spread to other areas.
Folliculitis thatâ s caused byÂ staph can start to grow inside your body. Over time, it can spread to your organs and blood. While this is rare, it can be deadly if not treated right away.
If your doctor needs to treat your folliculitis with antibiotics, you could also have side effects from the drug.
To lower your chances of getting folliculitis, your best bet is to stop shaving for at least three months. But for a lot of people, that wonâ t do. You might want to try an electric razor or other hair removal methods, such as depilatories. If those donâ t work for you, then follow these steps for shaving.
Wash your skin with warm water and a gentle cleanser.
Apply plenty of gel or shaving cream, not soap, and let it sit for 5-10 minutes to soften your hair.
Use a new blade each time you shave so you know itâ s clean and sharp; single blades are ideal.
Rinse with warm water and use moisturizing lotion.
Another way to avoid folliculitis is to limit your use of oils and other greasy skin products. These can cause blockages and trap bacteria. Other things you can do:
Dip into hot tubs only if you know for sure they are clean and well-maintained.
Use clean towels, razors, and other personal care items, and avoid sharing them with anyone else.
Avoid getting too close to others who have folliculitis. They may pass on their germs without realizing it.
Talk to your doctor about trying an anti-dandruff shampoo. If your folliculitis is caused by yeast, using the shampoo on itchy parts of your skin may make a difference.
Avoid clothes that irritate your skin or trap heat and sweat, such as Lycra, rubber gloves, and high boots. Instead, choose loose clothing made with fabrics (like cotton) that let your skin breathe. This will cut back on sweat and friction.
Remove and rinse off your swimsuit as soon as you get out of a hot tub or pool.
Do laundry often. Wash towels, sheets, and sweaty clothing in hot, soapy water to kill germs.
Folliculitis is a common and usually minor skin problem. Most of the time, it clears up with self-care at home.Â
See your doctor if it doesnâ t clear up within a couple of weeks, or if your symptoms are serious.
Folliculitis may look like other skin conditions, including acne, insect bites, or impetigo. If home treatments aren â t helping your symptoms, your doctor may be able to tell if something else is causing them.
A typical case of folliculitis goes away in 7-10 days without treatment. More severe cases can last longer or return, but medical treatment usually works well for them.
Certain types of folliculitis, especially on the scalp or other areas with hair, can cause hair loss if they go untreated.
If you are concerned about your folliculitis and it doesnâ t go away with home treatment, see a doctor.