A brain tumor (also called an intracranial tumor) is a cluster of abnormal cells that grows in or around your brain . There are over a hundred types of tumors that develop in the human brain.
Most brain tumors are benign, which means they grow slowly, have clearly defined borders, and are less likely than malignant tumors to invade surrounding tissues or other parts of your body. Benign tumors may not cause any symptoms or long-term problems unless they grow large enough to press on other areas of your brain.
About a third of brain tumors are malignant, which means they:
Easily spread to surrounding tissues and other parts of your body
Read on to learn more about the different types of brain tumors.
Brain tumors develop because the DNA in the cells that make up the tumor has been damaged in such a way that the cells no longer function in the way they re supposed to. But experts don t know exactly how this happens. When the DNA is damaged in this way, the abnormal cells multiply and grow faster than your normal cells, which forms the tumor.
Usually, environmental exposure adds to the DNA damage. Sometimes, people are born with DNA damage and they get tumors at a very young age.Â
Most of the time, doctors canâ t tell what causes a brain tumor. There are only a few known risk factors for brain tumors in adults.
Exposure to radiation . Children who receive radiation to the head have a higher risk of getting a brain tumor as adults.
Family history . Some brain tumors are linked to certain rare genetic conditions such as neurofibromatosis or Li-Fraumeni syndrome.
Age. People between ages 65 and 79 make up the population most likely to be diagnosed with a brain tumor.
No history of chickenpox . One study has found that people who had chickenpox are less likely to get gliomas.
Benign brain tumors generally grow more slowly than malignant brain tumors and don t tend to spread to surrounding tissues. But these can still be serious and even life-threatening, depending on:
If it s compressing other areas of your brain
If it s interfering with blood flow or cerebrospinal fluid movement in your nervous systemÂ
Benign brain tumors usually have clearly defined borders and arenâ t deep-rooted in your brain. This makes them easier to remove with surgery if theyâ re in an area of the brain where itâ s safe to operate. Some brain tumors can come back after they re removed. But benign tumors are less likely to come back than malignant ones.
Malignant primary brain tumors are malignant tumors that start in the cells of your brain. These typically grow faster than benign tumors and may quickly invade surrounding tissue. Although brain cancer rarely spreads to other organs, it can spread to other parts of your brain and central nervous system.
Secondary brain tumors are malignant tumors that started in other cells of your body. They come from cancer that started somewhere and spread (metastasized) to your brain. About 1 in 4 people with cancer develop a secondary brain tumor.Â
Cancers that are most likely to metastasize to your brain include:
Experts have classified over 150 types of brain tumors. Primary brain tumors are named for the kind of cell in which they start in your central nervous system . Your central nervous system is made up of your brain and spinal cord.Â
Examples of benign brain tumors include:
About 10%-15% of all brain tumors are meningiomas (pronounced muh-nih-jee- ow -muhs). These are the most common benign brain tumors, although a small percentage are malignant. These tumors start in your meninges, which are the tissues that cover and protect your brain and spinal cord. As meningiomas grow, they can put pressure on your brain tissues, cranial nerves, and blood vessels. In some cases, they grow into the bones of your head and face, which my change the shape of your skull and face.
These may also be called vestibular schwannomas (pronounced shwuh- now -muhs), neurilemmomas (pronounced nyoor-uh-lem- oh -muhs), or acoustic neuromas (pronounced nr- ow -muhs). Schwannomas are common benign tumors in adults. They start in the cells that line your nerves and provide insulation for the electrical impulses that move between your nerve cells. They can start around any cranial or spinal nerve, but they most often start around the eighth cranial nerve, or the vestibulocochlear (pronounced vuh-sti-byoo-low- kow -klee-ur) nerve. This is the nerve that connects your ear and brain. They can cause complications if they grow and put pressure on your nerves and brain. Â
About 13% of all brain tumors are pituitary (pronounced puh- too -uh-teh-ree) Â tumors. They start in your pituitary gland, which is deep inside your brain. Your pituitary gland makes and releases several hormones that are necessary for many of your bodily functions, including metabolism, reproduction, and your water and salt balance. They re generally benign, slow-growing, and rarely spread to other tissues. Pituitary tumors are most common in adults over age 50, but sometimes children get them. Because your pituitary gland is so deep inside your brain, these tumors are difficult to remove. But medical treatment with hormone replacement therapy is usually successful.Â
Chordomas (pronounced kor- doe -muhs) are rare, slow-growing tumors that most commonly start at the base of your skull or the lower part of your spine (also called the sacrum). They start in cells that are left over from when you were developing as a fetus. Most people who are diagnosed with a chordoma are between 50 and 60 years old. These are mostly benign tumors, but they can grow into bone that s near the tumor and put pressure on it, which can cause symptoms. They may block your ventricles, which are four cavities deep in your brain where your cerebrospinal fluid is made. Your cerebrospinal fluid nourishes and protects your brain and spinal cord. If the tumor blocks your ventricles, you may get water on the brain (hydrocephalus).
Craniopharyngiomas (pronounced kray-nee-ow-fe-ruhn-jee- ow -muhs) are benign tumors that usually start in the base of your brain near your optic nerves or your hypothalamus, above your pituitary gland. Like chordomas, these start in cells that are left over from fetal development. They most often occur in adults in their 50s and 60s, though they can happen in children, too.
About 78% of malignant brain tumors in adults are gliomas (pronounced glai- ow -muhs). These start in your glial cells, which are the cells that give structural support to the other cells in your brain. Glial cells include astrocytes, ependymal cells, and oligodendroglial cells. Tumors that start in these types of glial cells include:
About half of all primary brain and spinal cord tumors are astrocytomas (pronounced a-strow-sai- tow -muhs). These tumors can start in many parts of your brain, but they re most common in your cerebrum. Your cerebrum is the largest part of your brain, and it controls many functions, including movement, temperature regulation, speech, judgment, thinking, reasoning, problem-solving, emotions, and learning. They can happen in people of any age, including children, but they are most common in adults, especially middle-aged men and people assigned male at birth. In children, they re mostly low-grade, but in adults, they re mostly high-grade.Â
One form of astrocytoma is called glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). This tumor type can start in several types of cells, including your astrocytes and oligodendrocytes. These tend to grow very fast and spread to other tissues. They re most common in people 50-70 years old, especially men and people assigned male at birth. It s a very challenging tumor to treat because there are four subtypes that respond differently to the available treatments.
About 2%-3% of brain tumors are ependymomas (pronounced uh- pen -duh-mow-muhs). They occur in children and adults. They start in the ependymal cells that line the ventricles in your brain where your cerebrospinal fluid is made. They may block the flow of your cerebrospinal fluid and cause hydrocephalus. They may also extend into your spinal cord.
Medulloblastomas (pronounced muh-doo-luh-bla- stow -muhs) usually start in your cerebellum or near your brain stem and are most common in children. Your cerebellum is a part of brain at the back of your head that helps control your voluntary muscle movements, and maintain your posture, sense of balance, and equilibrium. Medulloblastomas tend to be high-grade tumors, but they also respond well to radiation and chemotherapy.
Oligodendroglimas (pronounced aa-luh-gow-den-drow-glai- ow -muhs) usually start in cells that make myelin, which is the electrical insulation for your nerve cells. They tend to occur more frequently in the frontal and temporal lobes. Your frontal lobe is at the front of your head and controls things like your personality, ability to make decisions, and ability to move voluntarily. Your temporal lobes are at the sides of your head, just above and behind your ears. These lobes control your short-term memory, speech, ability to recognize musical rhythm, and some of your ability to detect smells. Oligodendrogliomas are more common in adults in their 20s to 40s but can happen in children too. They seem to be more common in men and people assigned male at birth than women and people assigned female at birth.
Experts generally classify brain tumor types using the World Health Organization (WHO) system for classifying tumors of the central nervous system. This system is based on what the tumor cells look like under a microscope and what is happening with the genes and proteins in these cells.Â
These classifications are called grades, and they give your doctor an idea of how fast the tumor is likely to grow and whether it s likely to spread. In general, grade 1 and 2 tumors are benign, and grade 3 and 4 tumors are malignant. But some low-grade tumors become high-grade over time.Â
Using this information, your doctor can help you pick out your best treatment option.
Grade 1 (low-grade): The tumor cells look very much like healthy cells in the same tissues. These tumors are the least likely to grow and spread.
Grade 2 (low-grade): The tumor cells may have some abnormalities that make them look less like healthy cells. These tumors usually grow slowly, but they may also grow into nearby areas of your brain.
Grade 3 (high-grade): The tumor cells look clearly abnormal. These tumors may grow fast and spread to other parts of your brain and spinal cord.
Grade 4: (high-grade): The tumor cells look very abnormal. These tumors tend to grow very fast and spread to other parts of your brain and spinal cord. They also tend to return after treatment.
Symptoms of brain tumors vary according to the type of tumor and where it is in your brain. Since different areas of your brain control different functions of your body, the tumor s location affects the symptoms you have.
Some tumors may cause no symptoms unless they grow large and press on other areas of your brain. Then, they may cause serious, rapid changes in your health. Other tumors may have symptoms that develop slowly over time.
Symptoms that a number of brain tumors have in common include:
Headache s. These may be more serious in the morning or may wake you up at night.
Seizures , particularly if you don t have a history of seizures
Problems thinking, speaking, or articulating your thoughts
Weakness or paralysis in one side of your body
Dizziness or problems with your sense of balance
Changes in your ability to hear or ringing in the ears (tinnitus)
You can get many of these symptoms from lots of conditions. So don t assume you have a brain tumor just because you have some of them. If you do have some of these symptoms, it s time to go in for a checkup with your doctor.
Brain tumors are one of most common solid tumor types in kids and teens. And about 72% of the children who are diagnosed with a brain tumor are younger than age 15. Children can get several types of brain tumors, but the tumors usually start in different tissues from those in adults.
The following tumor types are more common in kids than adults:
Diagnosis can be a complicated process that involves several specialists. Your doctor will likely start by asking questions about your symptoms, overall health, and family health history. Then theyâ ll do a physical exam , including a neurological exam. During a neurological exam, your doctor will test your:
If they suspect a brain tumor, your doctor may request one or more of the following tests:
Imaging studies, such as a computed tomography (CT) scan or magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI) of your brain. They will most likely use an MRI, which is the best imaging test to identify a brain tumor, but they may use a CT scan if you can t have an MRI for some reason. You will likely need to be injected with a contrast agent before your test. This makes the tumor easier to see.
Tumor marker tests. Certain tumors will produce specific chemicals called tumor markers. Your doctor can test for these in your blood, pee, or tissue.
Biopsy . A neurosurgeon may take a biopsy when you go in for surgery to have the tumor removed. Or, they may do a stereotactic biopsy, during which they take a sample of your tissue through a needle inserted into a small hole in your skull.
Spinal tap (also called lumbar puncture). Your doctor will do this if they suspect that the tumor has invaded the tissue surrounding your brain (meninges). During this procedure, they remove a sample of cerebrospinal fluid from your spine to look for cancer cells.
Your doctor may also do testing called biomarker testing on your biopsy sample. They may also call this testing tumor testing, genomic testing, genomic profiling, molecular testing, or molecular profiling. Biomarker testing gives your doctor information about what s happening with the genes and proteins in your tumor. Biomarker testing can help confirm their diagnosis, and give them an idea about which treatments may be the best options for you and what your prognosis may be.
Your doctor will consider several things in deciding how to treat your brain tumor, including:
If your tumor is small and not causing you symptoms, your doctor may suggest watching and waiting, also called watchful waiting or active surveillance. This is when your doctor monitors your health with regular testing. If you start to get symptoms or it looks like your tumor is growing, they will help you choose another treatment option.
In most cases, your doctor will want to remove the tumor. Your neurosurgeon will try to remove as much of the tumor as possible without injuring your brain tissue. Your neurosurgeon may do this with a craniotomy. During a craniotomy, your neurosurgeon will remove part of your skull to access your brain during surgery. They will usually use imaging or another surgical navigation system to help them find and completely remove the tumor without damaging your other brain tissues.
If you have hydrocephalus, you may also need a ventriculoperitoneal shunt inserted to help blocked cerebrospinal fluid drain out of your skull. This is usually a permanent fitting that drains your cerebrospinal fluid into the area around the organs in your belly.Â
Some tumors can t be surgically removed because of their location in the brain. In those cases, your doctor will likely suggest chemotherapy,Â radiation therapy, or both to help shrink or remove your tumor. You may also get chemotherapy and radiation therapy after surgery to help kill any remaining cancer cells.
Chemotherapy uses medicines to kill cancer cells or slow their growth. Studies show that chemotherapy can improve overall survival in about 20% of people with primary malignant brain tumors. Currently, doctors have no way of predicting who will benefit the most from chemotherapy. But chemotherapy seems to be most effective for some pediatric tumors, lymphomas, and some oligodendrogliomas. Some chemotherapy medicines that are used for brain tumors include:
Nitrosourea, such as Lomustine and carmustine
Radiation therapy uses a radiation source, such as X-rays, gamma rays, neutrons, and protons, to damage the DNA in cancer cells. This can kill the cancer cells and shrink your tumor. Modern radiation therapy methods reduce your risk of long-term radiation injury. This is because modern methods direct the radiation as specifically as possible at your tumor and protects your surrounding tissue. You may get radiation therapy using an external source of radiation, such as:
Standard external beam radiation therapy
Stereotactic radiosurgery (also called Gamma Knife or CyberKnife)
You may also get brachytherapy, or internal radiation therapy, where your neurosurgeon places the radiation source in your brain at the time of surgery to help kill any remaining tumor cells.
Immunotherapy (or biologic therapy) uses medicines that help your immune system kill cancer cells. Some medicines may tag the cancer cells so that your immune system can recognize them more easily. Other medicines may boost your immune system to fight the cancer cells. Some examples of immunotherapy include:
Immune checkpoint inhibitors, such as ipilimumab, nivolumab, and pembrolizumab
Monoclonal antibodies, such as nivolumab and pembrolizumab (these are both immune checkpoint inhibitors and monoclonal antibodies)
Laser interstitial thermal therapy (LITT)
This is a newer technique where your doctor inserts a small catheter into the tumor and then uses a laser to kill and remove it. LITT is also used to treat some forms of epilepsy.
Palliative care focuses on relieving your symptoms and improving your quality of life when you re managing an incurable condition. For instance, you may get medicines to help relieve your pain, nausea, or anxiety. You may also see a therapist, social worker, or spiritual adviser as part of your care. Talk to your doctor about adding palliative care to your treatment plan. Research shows that palliative care can help you live your best life longer when you re managing a long-term health condition.
Possible Complications of Brain Tumor Treatment
Because treatment for cancer can damage healthy tissue, talk to your doctor about possible long-term effects of treatments in your plan. For instance, your doctor can explain the importance of rehabilitation after your treatment. Rehabilitation could involve working with several therapists, such as:
Physical therapists to regain strength and balance
Speech therapists for help with speaking, expressing thoughts, or swallowing
Occupational therapists to help manage daily activities such as using the bathroom, bathing, and dressing
Your individual circumstances play a very large role in your prognosis. For instance, survival rates vary based on many things, including:
Whether the tumor can be removed by surgery
Whether this is a new tumor or has come back after previous treatment
How much your tumor affects your ability to function
The five-year relative survival rate for all patients with a primary brain tumor is 76%. For people with benign brain tumors, the five-year relative survival rate is 92%.
10 Questions to Ask Your Doctor About Brain Tumors
If you were recently diagnosed with a brain tumor, ask your doctor these questions at your next visit.
1. What type of brain tumor do I have, and what is its grade?
2. What are the symptoms of brain cancer ?
3. Which part of my brain is affected by the tumor, and what does this region of the brain do?
4. Will it be possible to surgically remove my tumor?
5. If you can t surgically remove the tumor, will I need other treatments, such as chemotherapy or radiotherapy?
6. What are the possible side effects of these therapies?
7. Who might my treatment team include, and for how long will I continue to see them?
8. Are there alternative treatments for my condition?
9. Will there be any lasting problems from this disease or its treatment?
10. Are there any support groups in the area that I can contact?
A brain tumor is a clump of abnormal cells that grow in or around your brain. There are over a hundred types of brain tumors, including benign and malignant tumors. Most brain tumors are benign, which means they tend to grow slowly and are less likely to spread to other areas. Your doctor will do some tests to determine the grade of your tumor. This gives them an idea of how likely it is to grow and spread. Your treatment options will depend on what type of tumor you have and what grade your tumor is.
Yes, in some cases, it s possible to cure a brain tumor. For instance, if your tumor is benign, you may be cured when you have surgery to remove it. If your tumor is malignant, it may also be possible to cure if it s caught early and removed with surgery.
Is it possible to live with a brain tumor?
Yes, many people with a benign brain tumor can live years without symptoms. And some people with a malignant tumor may be cured with surgery or radiation therapy. Over a third of people with a malignant brain tumor live at least five years after they re diagnosed.Â
What is the success rate for brain tumor surgery?
This is a challenging question to answer because the success rate for surgery depends on many things, including whether your tumor is benign or malignant, what type of surgery you re having, if it s possible to completely remove the tumor, and how healthy you are when you have surgery. Ask your neurosurgeon about their success rate for the specific procedure you re having.