Overview What Is Heart Disease? Are You at Risk? Prevention
Symptoms Types Symptoms Types of Heart Disease Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) Peripheral Artery Disease (PAD)
Treatment Interventions Medications Care
Appointment Prep Transthyretin Amyloid Cardiomyopathy (ATTR-CM) Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM)
Transthyretin Amyloid Cardiomyopathy (ATTR-CM)
Angina is chest pain that happens when there isn t enough blood going to part of your heart. It can feel like a heart attack, with pressure or squeezing in your chest. It s sometimes called angina pectoris or ischemic chest pain.
It s a symptom of heart disease. It happens when something blocks your arteries, reducing the flow of oxygen-rich blood to your heart.
Angina usually goes away quickly. Still, it can be a sign of a life-threatening heart problem. It s important to find out what s going on and what you can do to avoid a heart attack.
Usually, medicine and lifestyle changes can control angina. If it s more serious, you may need surgery. Or you may need what s called a stent, a tiny tube that props open arteries.
Heart disease can also cause a heart attack. In a heart attack, blood flow to the heart is blocked for a longer time than in angina. This causes part of the heart muscle to die, which is permanent damage. The drop in blood flow to your heart in angina is short-term. So it doesn t cause permanent damage.
This is the most common type of angina. Physical activity or stress can trigger it. It usually lasts a few minutes, and it goes away when you rest. It isn t a heart attack, but it can be a sign that you re more likely to have one. Tell your doctor if this happens to you.
You can have unstable angina while you re at rest or not very active. The pain can be strong and long-lasting, and it may keep coming back. It can be a signal that you re about to have a heart attack, so see a doctor right away.
With microvascular angina, you have chest pain but no coronary artery blockage. Instead, it happens because your smallest coronary arteries aren t working the way they should, so your heart doesn t get the blood it needs. The chest pain usually lasts more than 10 minutes. This type is more common in women.
This type of angina is rare. It might happen at night while you re sleeping or resting. Your heart arteries suddenly tighten or narrow. It can cause a lot of pain, and you should get it treated.
Chest pain is the symptom, but it affects people differently. You may have:
You might mistake an aching or burning for heartburn or gas.
You re likely to have pain behind your breastbone, which can spread to your shoulders, arms, neck, throat, jaw, or back.
Stable angina often gets better with rest, while unstable angina may not â and it could get worse. It s an emergency that needs medical help right away.
Men often feel pain in their chest, neck, and shoulders. Women may feel discomfort in their belly, neck, jaw, throat, or back. You may also have shortness of breath, sweating, or dizziness.
One study found that women were more likely to use the words pressing or crushing to describe the feeling.
What Are the Symptoms of a Heart Attack?
You get aÂ heart attack whenÂ blood flow to yourÂ heart muscle gets restricted or blocked, often by a clot in anÂ artery. Without oxygen, yourÂ heart muscle gets damaged or could even die.
A 2008 study in the Â American Journal of Critical Care Â found thatÂ chest pain is the most frequently reported heart attack symptom, and 61% of 256 participants said their symptoms were constant.
If you ve not experienced it before, patients often aren t sure what it is when it first comes on, says Kristin Newby, MD, a cardiologist at the Duke Heart Center in Durham, North Carolina.
The same study found that women were about 8 years older than men when they began to have heart trouble and were more likely to report a higher intensity of five other symptoms:
The study found that 21% of women and 10% of men had no symptoms. Less typical symptoms for both men and women include:
Discomfort in the neck, arms, jaw, back, orÂ stomach
Men and women may respond differently to the symptoms of a heart attack, particularly if the symptoms are vague. But if you have symptoms consistent with a heart attack, don t wait at home. Go to the hospital, says Alfred Sacchetti, MD, an emergency room doctor.
Angina usually happens because of heart disease. A fatty substance called plaque builds up in your arteries, blocking blood flow to your heart muscle. This forces your heart to work with less oxygen, which causes pain. You may also have blood clots in the arteries of your heart, which can cause heart attacks.
Less common causes of chest pain include:
A blockage in a major artery of your lungs (pulmonary embolism)
An enlarged or thickened heart (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy)
Narrowing of a valve in the main part of your heart ( aortic stenosis )
Swelling of the sac around your heart (pericarditis)
Tearing in the wall of your aorta, the largest artery in your body (aortic dissection)
Some things about you or your lifestyle could put you at a higher risk of angina, including:
Your doctor will do a physical exam and ask about your symptoms, risk factors, and family history. They might need to do tests, including:
EKG. This test measures your heart s electrical activity and rhythm.
Stress test. This checks how your heart is working while you exercise.
Blood tests. Your doctor will check for proteins called troponins . Lots of them are released when your heart muscle is damaged, as in a heart attack. Your doctor may also do more general tests, such as a metabolic panel or complete blood count.
Imaging tests. Chest X-rays can rule out other things that might be causing your chest pain, such as lung conditions. Echocardiograms and CT and MRI scans can create images of your heart to help your doctor spot problems.
Cardiac catheterization. Your doctor inserts a long, thin tube into an artery in your leg and threads it up to your heart to check your blood flow and pressure.
Coronary angiography. Your doctor injects dye into the blood vessels of your heart. The dye shows up on an X-ray , creating an image of your blood vessels. They may do this procedure during cardiac catheterization.
What can I do to try to prevent a heart attack?
Your treatment depends on how much damage there is to your heart. For people with mild angina, medicine and lifestyle changes can often help their blood flow better and control their symptoms.
Your doctor might prescribe medicines including:
Nitrates or calcium channel blockers to relax and widen blood vessels, letting more blood flow to your heart
Beta-blockers to slow your heart down so it doesn t have to work as hard
Blood thinners or antiplatelet medications to prevent blood clots
Statins to lower your cholesterol levels and stabilize plaque
If meds aren t enough, you may need to have a medical procedure or surgery to open blocked arteries. This could be:
Angioplasty/stenting. You r doctor threads a tiny tube, with a balloon inside, through a blood vessel and up to your heart. Then, they inflate the balloon inside the narrowed artery to widen it and restore blood flow. They may insert a small tube called a stent inside your artery to help keep it open. The stent is permanent and usually made of metal. It can also be made of a material that your body absorbs over time. Some stents also have medicine that helps keep your artery from getting blocked again.
The procedure usually takes less than two hours. You ll probably stay overnight at the hospital.
Coronary artery bypass grafting or bypass surgery. Your surgeon takes healthy arteries or veins from another part of your body and uses them to go around the blocked or narrowed blood vessels.
You can expect to stay in the hospital for about a week after you have this. You ll be in the intensive care unit for one or two days while nurses and doctors keep a close eye on your heart rate, blood pressure, and oxygen levels. You ll then move to a regular room to recover.
Enhanced external counterpulsation (EECP)
EECP may be an option to relieve your angina. Your doctor may recommend it if other treatments haven t worked or aren t right for you.
EECP uses several blood pressure cuffs on both legs to gently but firmly compress the blood vessels, helping boost blood flow to your heart. Each wave is timed to your heartbeat. So more blood goes there when it s relaxing.
When your heart pumps again, pressure is released right away. This allows blood to be pumped more easily. It can help your blood vessels make a natural bypass around narrowed or blocked arteries that cause your chest pain. It may help some small blood vessels in your heart open. They may give more blood flow to your heart muscle to help ease your chest pain.
Nitrates, calcium channel blockers, and beta-blockers haven t helped you
Invasive procedures such as bypass surgery, angioplasty, or stenting aren t right for you
EECP isn t invasive. If you re accepted for EECP treatment, you ll have 35 hours of therapy. It s given for one to two hours a day, five days a week, for seven weeks. Studies show its benefits include less need for angina medicine, fewer symptoms, and the ability to be more active without symptoms.
What s the Prognois After Experiencing Angina?
Angina raises your risk of having a heart attack. But it s treatable. Consider it a warning sign and make healthy choices.
Talk with others who have it. This may help you learn how to feel better.
Your family, too, may need support to help them understand your angina . They ll want to know what they can do to help.
You can still be active, but it s important to listen to your body. If you feel pain, stop what you re doing and rest. Know what triggers your angina, such as stress or intense exercise. Try to avoid things that tend to cause it. For example, if large meals cause problems, eat smaller ones and eat more often. If you still feel pain, talk to your doctor about having more tests or changing your medications. Because angina can be a sign of something dangerous, it s important to get checked out.
These lifestyle tips may help protect your heart:
If you smoke, stop because it can damage your blood vessels and increase the risk of heart disease.
Eat a heart-healthy diet to lower your blood pressure and cholesterol levels. When those are out of normal range, your chance of getting heart disease can rise. Eat mainly fruits and vegetables, whole grains, fish, lean meat, and fat-free or low-fat dairy. Limit salt, fat, and sugar.
Do things to lower stress, such as meditation, deep breathing, or yoga, to relax.
If you have chest pain that is new or unusual and you think you may be having a heart attack, call 911 right away. Quick treatment is very important. It can protect you from more damage.
Angina is chest pain that happens when the flow of blood to your heart briefly decreases.
Angina does not cause permanent damage to your heart like a heart attack does.
It can be treated with medication or medical procedures, such as having a stent or a tiny balloon to help open the arteries. Sometimes, coronary bypass surgery is needed.
Getting exercise, eating a nutritious diet, and managing your stress level are among the things you can do that can help keep your heart healthier.
Not exactly. Angina means chest pain, but it can sometimes signal a heart attack. Angina can be a sign of very serious heart issues. When you have chest pain, it s important to see a doctor right away.
What s the life expectancy of someone with angina?
Angina is not life-threatening or a disease. It s a symptom of an underlying heart condition. Your life expectancy with that condition depends on many different factors and varies widely.
What happens if angina is left untreated?
It may lead to serious health issues such as a heart attack, stroke, or heart failure.
Diet and lifestyle changes may help manage and sometimes even reverse your angina. But it s important to see a heart specialist who can diagnose your condition and prescribe treatment.