Overview What Is Coronavirus? Variants Long COVID
Diagnosis and Treatment Diagnosis Treatment
If you haveÂ high blood pressure , also called hypertension, it s a good idea to take extra care to protect yourself from COVID-19. Having uncontrolled high blood pressure puts you at a greater risk for complications from COVID-19.Â
High blood pressure was the common denominator among those hospitalized for COVID. Having hypertension can almost double the risk of severe COVID illness or death. OtherÂ things that can increase your risk of complications or severe illness from COVID include cancer, diabetes, and lung disease.Â
Â It has also been shown that having COVID-19 may boost your risk of getting high blood pressure.Â
Why people with high blood pressureÂ may be at higher risk for serious illness with COVID-19 is not yet understood. One possibility could be in the relationship between hypertension and the immune system. Â Long-term health conditions and aging weaken your immune system so it s less able to fight off the virus. Almost two-thirds of people over 60 have high blood pressure.
Another possibility is that the higher risk comes not from high blood pressure itself, but from certain drugs used to treat it -- ACE inhibitors and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs).
This theory may come from research that suggests these types of medications weaken the bodyâ s immune cells.
But other large studies found no ties between the use of these drugs and how severe COVID-19 is. Still other research suggests that they may make COVID-19 less severe. Thereâ s also no proof that people have less severe illness after stopping them.
Stopping these medications may make heart and kidney disease worse. It can also raise your risk of death.
The American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association recommend that you keep taking your high blood pressure medicine as prescribed. If you donâ t, it could raise your risk for a heart attack or stroke .Â
How Coronavirus Affects People With High Blood Pressure
While pneumonia is the most common complication of the virus, it can also damage the cardiovascular system.Â
High blood pressure damages arteries and reduces the flow of blood to your heart. That means your heart has to work harder to pump enough blood. Over time, this extra work can weaken your heart to the point where it can t pump as much oxygen-rich blood to your body.
Coronavirus can also damage the heart directly, which can be especially risky if your heart is already weakened by the effects of high blood pressure. The virus may cause inflammation of the heart muscle called myocarditis , which makes it harder for the heart to pump.
If you also have plaque buildup in your arteries, the virus may make those plaques more likely to break apart and cause a heart attack. Past studies have shown that people with heart disease who get a respiratory illness like the flu or earlier types of coronavirus are at higher risk for a heart attack.
Everyone needs to take precautions to prevent coronavirus. People with high blood pressure and other health conditions need to be extra careful.
The CDC offers this advice to reducing your risk of getting COVID:
Get vaccinated against COVID-19 from one of the approved vaccines and check the CDC website to make sure that you are up to date on your vaccine booster shots.
Make sure you have enough medicine on hand to treat high blood pressure and other health conditions.
Stock up on over-the-counter medicines to treat a fever and other symptoms if you get sick.
Avoid crowds, or wear a face mask if you are concerned about transmission of the virus.
Wash your hands often with soap and warm water.
Clean and disinfect all frequently touched surfaces like countertops and doorknobs.