Causes, Risks Prevention Causes Risks Screening Prevention
Treatment Side Effects Overview of Treatment Chemotherapy Chemo Side Effects Radiation Immunotherapy Cutting-Edge Treatments Complementary Alternative Medicine
Living With Daily Life Diet Exercise Pain, Fatigue Mental Health
Appointment Prep Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Polycythemia Vera Myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDS) Myelofibrosis Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML)
It s the most common type of kidney cancer . Although itâ s a serious disease, finding and treating it early makes it more likely that youâ ll be cured. No matter when youâ re diagnosed, you can do certain things to ease your symptoms and feel better during your treatment.
Most people who have renal cell carcinoma are older, usually between ages 50 and 70. It often starts as just one tumor in a kidney , but sometimes it begins as several tumors, or itâ s found in both kidneys at once. You might also hear it called renal cell cancer.
Doctors have different ways to treat renal cell carcinoma, and scientists are testing new ones, too. Youâ ll want to learn as much about your disease as you can and work with your doctor so you can choose the best treatment.
Scientists arenâ t sure exactly what causes renal cell carcinoma. They know that most kidney cancers start when something goes wrong in the genes in the kidney. No one can say for certain why that happens.
Several things can raise your chances of getting the disease, like:
Taking a lot of pain medicine, like aspirin , ibuprofen , or acetaminophen , for a long time
Exposure to certain dyes, asbestos , cadmium (a metal), herbicides, and solvents
Having acquired cystic kidney diseaseÂ (especially in dialysis patients)
Some inherited conditions, especially von Hippel- Lindau disease
Early on, renal cell carcinoma doesnâ t usually cause any symptoms. As the disease gets more serious, you might have warning signs like:
A lump on your side, belly, or lower back
Your doctor will want to find out more about your symptoms to figure out whatâ s going on. First, theyâ ll give you a physical exam and ask you questions like:
Does anything make your symptoms better or worse?
Has anyone in your family had von Hippel-Lindau disease? What about kidney cancer?
From there, theyâ ll do some tests that could include:
Tests to see how well your liver is working
Ultrasound , which uses sound waves to make a picture of the organs inside your body
CT scan , a test that uses a powerful X-ray to make detailed pictures inside your body
Nephrectomy, when doctors remove part of one of your kidneys, or sometimes the whole kidney, to check it for renal cell carcinoma . Youâ ll have this test if your doctor has already spotted a tumor, but doesnâ t know if itâ s cancer.
If the results show that you have renal cell carcinoma, your doctor will find out what stage itâ s in, so you can decide on the best treatment options. The stage of cancer depends on how large your tumor is and whether the cancer has spread to other parts of your body. You may have tests to take a closer look inside your chest and belly, like:
MRI , which uses powerful magnets and radio waves to make pictures of the inside of your body
What stage is my cancer? What does that mean for me?
Have you ever treated this kind of cancer before?
What kinds of treatments are there? Which would you recommend?
Are there any clinical trials I can sign up for?
There are a few different ways doctors can treat renal cell carcinoma. You may need to try several before finding one that works. The best plan for you depends on the stage of your cancer, how healthy you are overall, and any side effects you might have. Your options may include:
Surgery to remove part or all of the kidney
Biologic drugs, which boost your bodyâ s own defenses to fight cancer cells
Immunotherapy drugs such as interferon -alfa or interleukin-2
Targeted therapy -- treatments that attack specific things cancers need to survive, like a tumorâ s blood vessels or certain proteins; these include axitinib ( Inlyta ), bevacizumab ( Avastin ), cabozantinib ( Cabometyx ,Â Cometriq ), everolimus ( Afinitor ), lenvatinib ( Lenvima ), pazopanib ( Votrient ), sorafenib ( Nexavar ), sunitinib ( Sutent ), temsirolimus ( Torisel ), tivozanib ( Fotivda ), and b elzutifan ( Welireg ).
Ablation. This uses extreme cold or radio waves to destroy tumors.
Many kinds of cancer are treated with radiation or chemotherapy , or sometimes both. These treatments usually donâ t work well for renal cell carcinoma. In some cases, your doctor may still prescribe them to ease your symptoms or if other treatments havenâ t worked. Talk with them about these options and how they might make you feel.
Scientists also are looking for new ways to treat renal cell carcinoma in clinical trials. These trials test new drugs to see if they re safe and if they work. They often are a way for people to try new medicine that isn t available to everyone. Your doctor can tell you if one of these trials might be a good fit for you.
Itâ s important to treat your disease, but also to make sure you re comfortable. Tell your doctor if youâ re feeling any pain. TheyÂ can give you medicines to ease your symptoms.
You can do things during and after your treatment to feel stronger physically and emotionally.
Eat well. You need calories and nutrients to stay strong for treatment. If itâ s hard for you to eat, try smaller meals every few hours instead of three big meals.
Keep moving. Exercise is good for your body and your mind. Your treatment may leave you feeling tired, so be sure to balance activity with rest.
Follow your treatment plan. Keep your doctor in the loop about any changes in how youâ re feeling.
Get support. Itâ s important to take care of your emotional health, too. Trained counselors and support groups can offer safe places to talk about how you and your loved ones feel. Also, ask for help from family, friends, and members of your community.
Your outlook depends on the stage of your disease. The earlier you find and treat renal cell carcinoma, the better your progress will be. Treatment helps many people fight the cancer, and you have several good options to ease pain and other symptoms.
To get more information on renal cell carcinoma, visit the web site of the American Cancer Society .