Migraine triggers aren t the reason you have migraine. In fact, nobody knows what causes migraine or why some people have migraine attacks and others don t. But your triggers are events, changes, acts, or other external or internal stimuli that make a migraine attack more likely. Some triggers will be easy for you to manage and avoid, while others may be beyond your control. With migraine, one of the best things you can do is learn your personal migraine triggers that cause pain or other migraine symptoms. Red wine, caffeine withdrawal, stress, and skipped meals are among many common culprits, but everyone is different. You may notice that it takes more than one trigger to lead to an attack. The first step to avoiding your triggers is to figure out what they are. You can do this by tracking your migraine symptoms in a notebook, diary, or smartphone app. Note what you were doing before and when your migraine symptoms came on. What had you eaten? Were you dehydrated? How much sleep did you get the night before? Did anything stressful, exciting, or otherwise important happen that day? These are key clues to learning about your migraine attacks and their triggers.
Migraine triggers aren t the reason you have migraine. In fact, nobody knows what causes migraine or why some people have migraine attacks and others don t. But your triggers are events, changes, acts, or other external or internal stimuli that make a migraine attack more likely. Some triggers will be easy for you to manage and avoid, while others may be beyond your control.
With migraine, one of the best things you can do is learn your personal migraine triggers that cause pain or other migraine symptoms. Red wine, caffeine withdrawal, stress, and skipped meals are among many common culprits, but everyone is different. You may notice that it takes more than one trigger to lead to an attack.
The first step to avoiding your triggers is to figure out what they are. You can do this by tracking your migraine symptoms in a notebook, diary, or smartphone app. Note what you were doing before and when your migraine symptoms came on. What had you eaten? Were you dehydrated? How much sleep did you get the night before? Did anything stressful, exciting, or otherwise important happen that day? These are key clues to learning about your migraine attacks and their triggers.
An easy way to think of a trigger is that itâ s like a light switch: When it s flipped on, a process starts in your brain that can end in pain and other migraine symptoms . Another way to think about it is that you have a migraine threshold. When your triggers add up to a certain level, you ll get your familiar migraine symptoms. But it s not as simple as cause and effect. Something that triggers a migraine attack one day may not have the same effect on you another day. You re probably more likely to have a migraine episode if more than one of your triggers is present. For example, missing lunch one day might be OK. But if you miss lunch and didn t get enough sleep the night before, you may be more likely to get a migraine attack. Types of stress triggers Triggers vary from person to person but are often related to stress. They can be: Physical, such as dehydration , sleep loss, or hormone changes Emotional, such as anxiety Environmental, such as changes in the weather
An easy way to think of a trigger is that itâ s like a light switch: When it s flipped on, a process starts in your brain that can end in pain and other migraine symptoms . Another way to think about it is that you have a migraine threshold. When your triggers add up to a certain level, you ll get your familiar migraine symptoms.
But it s not as simple as cause and effect. Something that triggers a migraine attack one day may not have the same effect on you another day. You re probably more likely to have a migraine episode if more than one of your triggers is present. For example, missing lunch one day might be OK. But if you miss lunch and didn t get enough sleep the night before, you may be more likely to get a migraine attack.
Triggers vary from person to person but are often related to stress. They can be:
Physical, such as dehydration , sleep loss, or hormone changes
Environmental, such as changes in the weather
Everyone is different when it comes to migraine triggers. Some common ones to watch for include: Stress Menstrual periods Changes in your normal sleep pattern Lack of sleep Extreme fatigue Certain foods, such as aged cheese or processed snacks Certain drinks, such as those with alcohol or caffeine Food additives, such as artificial sweeteners or monosodium glutamate ( MSG ) Too much caffeine or withdrawal from it Alcohol Skipping meals or fasting Changes in the weather or barometric pressure Exercise Physical strain Smoking Bright, flickering lights Loud sounds Strong smells, such as perfume or paint thinner Certain medications, such as oral contraceptives or vasodilators Dehydration Hormonal changes
Everyone is different when it comes to migraine triggers. Some common ones to watch for include:
Certain foods, such as aged cheese or processed snacks
Certain drinks, such as those with alcohol or caffeine
Food additives, such as artificial sweeteners or monosodium glutamate ( MSG )
Changes in the weather or barometric pressure
Strong smells, such as perfume or paint thinner
Certain medications, such as oral contraceptives or vasodilators
Pay attention to what you eat and drink. If you get a migraine attack, write down the foods and drinks you had before it started. If you see a pattern over time, stay away from that item. Eat at regular intervals. Following your normal routine is key to avoiding migraine attacks. Don t skip meals or change your snacking or meal times too much from one day to the next.
Pay attention to what you eat and drink. If you get a migraine attack, write down the foods and drinks you had before it started. If you see a pattern over time, stay away from that item.
Eat at regular intervals. Following your normal routine is key to avoiding migraine attacks. Don t skip meals or change your snacking or meal times too much from one day to the next.
Curb the caffeine. Daily caffeine can raise the risk for migraine in some people. If youâ re one of them, slowly cut down on caffeine. (Thatâ s because suddenly missing your morning coffee can trigger a migraine attack .) If a cup of coffee each morning isn t one of your migraine triggers, it s OK to stick to that, too. Be careful with exercise. Everyone needs regular physical activity. It s a key part of being healthy. But it can be a migraine trigger for some people. If you re one of them, you can still work out. Ask your doctor what would help or see if they can refer you to a personal trainer who can help you find a good routine. Get regular shut-eye. If your sleep habits are disrupted, or if you re very tired , it can make a migraine episode more likely. Downsize your stress. There are many ways to do it. You could exercise, meditate , pray, spend time with people you love, take a walk in nature, and generally do things you enjoy. If you can change some of the things that make you tense, set up a plan for that. Counseling and stress management classes are great to try, too. You can also look into biofeedback, where you learn how to influence certain things (such as your heart rate and breathing) to calm down stress.
Curb the caffeine. Daily caffeine can raise the risk for migraine in some people. If youâ re one of them, slowly cut down on caffeine. (Thatâ s because suddenly missing your morning coffee can trigger a migraine attack .) If a cup of coffee each morning isn t one of your migraine triggers, it s OK to stick to that, too.
Be careful with exercise. Everyone needs regular physical activity. It s a key part of being healthy. But it can be a migraine trigger for some people. If you re one of them, you can still work out. Ask your doctor what would help or see if they can refer you to a personal trainer who can help you find a good routine.
Get regular shut-eye. If your sleep habits are disrupted, or if you re very tired , it can make a migraine episode more likely.
Downsize your stress. There are many ways to do it. You could exercise, meditate , pray, spend time with people you love, take a walk in nature, and generally do things you enjoy. If you can change some of the things that make you tense, set up a plan for that. Counseling and stress management classes are great to try, too. You can also look into biofeedback, where you learn how to influence certain things (such as your heart rate and breathing) to calm down stress.
Stay hydrated. Dehydration is a trigger for many people. Carry a water bottle with you and make sure you re getting enough fluids every day. Stay away from sensory stimulants. If bright lights, strong scents, or loud sounds bother you, take steps to avoid them as much as you can. Wearing sunglasses, earplugs, or noise-canceling headphones may also help. Avoid the heat. Weather changes can be a trigger you can t always control. But you can take steps to limit your exposure. If the summer heat bothers you, for example, try to avoid spending time outdoors during the hottest part of the day. Avoid taking medicine too much. It might seem counterintuitive, but taking medicine to help with your migraine attacks too often can lead to what s known as medication overuse headaches. If you find yourself in this vicious cycle, talk to your doctor or migraine specialist about a treatment plan that may help you avoid turning to over-the-counter or other medicines too often.
Stay hydrated. Dehydration is a trigger for many people. Carry a water bottle with you and make sure you re getting enough fluids every day.
Stay away from sensory stimulants. If bright lights, strong scents, or loud sounds bother you, take steps to avoid them as much as you can. Wearing sunglasses, earplugs, or noise-canceling headphones may also help.
Avoid the heat. Weather changes can be a trigger you can t always control. But you can take steps to limit your exposure. If the summer heat bothers you, for example, try to avoid spending time outdoors during the hottest part of the day.
Avoid taking medicine too much. It might seem counterintuitive, but taking medicine to help with your migraine attacks too often can lead to what s known as medication overuse headaches. If you find yourself in this vicious cycle, talk to your doctor or migraine specialist about a treatment plan that may help you avoid turning to over-the-counter or other medicines too often.
Some foods can be a migraine trigger, but it s not as common as many people think. The evidence for links between migraine and certain foods isn t strong. But some foods that might trigger migraine include: Foods that have tyramine in them, such as aged cheeses (such as blue cheese or Parmesan), smoked fish, and Chianti wine Alcohol, especially red wine Caffeine, which is in coffee, tea, colas, and other sodas Foods made with nitrates, such as pepperoni, hot dogs, and lunch meats Dried fruits Potato chips Pizza, peanuts, and chicken livers Bread and other baked goods with yeast, such as sourdough bread, bagels, doughnuts, and coffee cake Chocolate Cultured dairy products (such as yogurt and kefir ) Fruits or juices such as citrus fruits, dried fruits, bananas , raspberries, red plums, papayas, passion fruit , figs, dates, and avocados Nuts and nut butters Olives Soy products (miso, tempeh, soy sauce ) Tomatoes Vegetables such as onions, pea pods, some beans, corn, and sauerkraut Vinegar Food additives, such as artificial sweeteners or MSG
Some foods can be a migraine trigger, but it s not as common as many people think. The evidence for links between migraine and certain foods isn t strong. But some foods that might trigger migraine include:
Foods that have tyramine in them, such as aged cheeses (such as blue cheese or Parmesan), smoked fish, and Chianti wine
Caffeine, which is in coffee, tea, colas, and other sodas
Foods made with nitrates, such as pepperoni, hot dogs, and lunch meats
Bread and other baked goods with yeast, such as sourdough bread, bagels, doughnuts, and coffee cake
Cultured dairy products (such as yogurt and kefir )
Fruits or juices such as citrus fruits, dried fruits, bananas , raspberries, red plums, papayas, passion fruit , figs, dates, and avocados
Vegetables such as onions, pea pods, some beans, corn, and sauerkraut
Food additives, such as artificial sweeteners or MSG
Migraine triggers are events, stimuli, or other factors that make it more likely you ll have a migraine attack. It often takes more than one trigger to lead to an attack, but everyone is different. Along with treatment, learning your migraine triggers and taking steps to avoid or limit them as much as you can is one way to help you reduce your attacks.
What are common migraine triggers to avoid? Almost any external event or stimuli can trigger a migraine attack. Internal factors, such as dehydration, can be a trigger, too. It s best to learn your triggers so you know what to avoid. How can I identify my specific migraine triggers? Keep track of when your migraine attacks happen and the things that took place before your attack. Over time, you may start to notice patterns. Are there dietary changes that can help prevent migraines ? Foods or food additives can be a trigger. But it s not as common as many people think. If you notice you re getting a migraine attack after eating certain foods, avoid or limit them for a while and see if it helps with the severity or frequency of your migraine attacks.
What are common migraine triggers to avoid?
Almost any external event or stimuli can trigger a migraine attack. Internal factors, such as dehydration, can be a trigger, too. It s best to learn your triggers so you know what to avoid.
How can I identify my specific migraine triggers?
Keep track of when your migraine attacks happen and the things that took place before your attack. Over time, you may start to notice patterns.
Are there dietary changes that can help prevent migraines ?
Foods or food additives can be a trigger. But it s not as common as many people think. If you notice you re getting a migraine attack after eating certain foods, avoid or limit them for a while and see if it helps with the severity or frequency of your migraine attacks.
What lifestyle modifications can reduce the frequency of migraines? Healthy lifestyle modifications may help with your migraine attacks, depending on your triggers. Eating well and getting exercise are good for everyone. Take steps to reduce your stress levels, too. Can stress trigger a migraine? Yes. Stress is a common migraine trigger. Can stress management techniques help prevent migraines? For many people, stress is a migraine trigger. Migraine attacks also cause more stress. While there s no cure for migraine, finding techniques or strategies to lower your stress may help you reduce the number of attacks you re having.
What lifestyle modifications can reduce the frequency of migraines?
Healthy lifestyle modifications may help with your migraine attacks, depending on your triggers. Eating well and getting exercise are good for everyone. Take steps to reduce your stress levels, too.
Yes. Stress is a common migraine trigger.
Can stress management techniques help prevent migraines?
For many people, stress is a migraine trigger. Migraine attacks also cause more stress. While there s no cure for migraine, finding techniques or strategies to lower your stress may help you reduce the number of attacks you re having.
Cleveland Clinic: Migraines, Migraine Headache Diary, Migraines: Specific Foods, Migraines: Exercise, Migraines: Stress.
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: NINDS Migraine Information Page.
Office of Women s Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Migraine Fact Sheet.
Sutter Health: Common Migraine Headache Triggers.
National Migraine Centre: Migraine triggers?
American Migraine Foundation: Top 10 Migraine Triggers and How to Deal With Them, Stress and Migraine.
National Migraine Centre U.K.: Migraine triggers.
Weather, foods and drinks, and stress are just some of the things that can set off migraines. Learn your own migraine triggers and how to manage them.
Some pregnant women get fewer migraines, some get them worse, and others get them for the first time. Hereâ s how to soothe the pain.
Talking to Your Doctor? Hereâ s What to Say
Treatment can help you manage your migraine pain. Hereâ s what to tell your doctor about your headaches.
Migraines can strike anytime, but if youâ re prepared, you can keep pain at bay. Hereâ s what to keep on hand so youâ re ready before the first twinge.
Keep migraine symptoms to a minimum with muscle relaxation, temperature therapy, and other self-care techniques.