Understanding Voyxact for IgA Nephropathy
Navigating Anemia: What to Know About Aqvesme for Thalassemia Aqvesme is an oral prescription medicine for thalassemia. It helps red blood cells make and use energy more effectively.
Aqvesme is an oral prescription medicine for thalassemia. It helps red blood cells make and use energy more effectively.
Managing Hemophilia B With Rebinyn Rebinyn is an injectable medicine. Hereâ s how it replaces clotting Factor IX in people with hemophilia B.
Rebinyn is an injectable medicine. Hereâ s how it replaces clotting Factor IX in people with hemophilia B.
What to Know About Yartemlea for Transplant-Associated Thrombotic Microangiopathy Yartemlea is a monoclonal antibody. Hereâ s how it treats transplant-associated thrombotic microangiopathy.
Yartemlea is a monoclonal antibody. Hereâ s how it treats transplant-associated thrombotic microangiopathy.
Tavalisse for Chronic Immune Thrombocytopenia Tavalisse is an oral prescription medicine used to manage chronic immune thrombocytopenia (ITP). It helps protect platelets from being destroyed.
Tavalisse is an oral prescription medicine used to manage chronic immune thrombocytopenia (ITP). It helps protect platelets from being destroyed.
Recorlev for Hypercortisolemia Recorlev is an oral prescription medicine. Hereâ s how it treats high cortisol levels in people with Cushingâ s syndrome.
Recorlev is an oral prescription medicine. Hereâ s how it treats high cortisol levels in people with Cushingâ s syndrome.
Lyfgenia for Sickle Cell Disease Lyfgenia is a gene therapy. Hereâ s how it treats sickle cell disease.
Lyfgenia is a gene therapy. Hereâ s how it treats sickle cell disease.
Managing Acromegaly With Palsonify Palsonify is a once-daily prescription medicine. Hereâ s how it treats acromegaly.
Palsonify is a once-daily prescription medicine. Hereâ s how it treats acromegaly.
What to Know About Esperoct for Hemophilia A Esperoct is a factor VIII replacement therapy. Hereâ s how it treats hemophilia A.
Esperoct is a factor VIII replacement therapy. Hereâ s how it treats hemophilia A.
What to Know About Myhibbin for Prevention of Solid Organ Transplant Rejection Myhibbin is an immunosuppressant medicine. Hereâ s how it prevents organ transplant rejection.
Myhibbin is an immunosuppressant medicine. Hereâ s how it prevents organ transplant rejection.
Navigating Cushingâ s Syndrome: What to Know About Korlym for High Blood Sugar Korlym is a cortisol receptor blocker. Hereâ s how it treats high blood sugar in Cushingâ s syndrome.
Korlym is a cortisol receptor blocker. Hereâ s how it treats high blood sugar in Cushingâ s syndrome.
A Guide to Pivya for Bladder Infections Pivya is a penicillin-type antibiotic. Here s how it treats bladder infections.
Pivya is a penicillin-type antibiotic. Here s how it treats bladder infections.
How Wayrilz Works for Persistent or Chronic Immune Thrombocytopenia (ITP) Wayrilz is a Bruton s tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitor. Hereâ s how it treats immune thrombocytopenia.
Wayrilz is a Bruton s tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitor. Hereâ s how it treats immune thrombocytopenia.
How Givlaari Works for Acute Hepatic Porphyria (AHP) Givlaari is an RNA interference (RNAi) therapy. Here s how it treats acute hepatic porphyria (AHP).
Givlaari is an RNA interference (RNAi) therapy. Here s how it treats acute hepatic porphyria (AHP).
How Doptelet Works for Thrombocytopenia Doptelet is a thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor agonist. Hereâ s how it treats thrombocytopenia.
Doptelet is a thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor agonist. Hereâ s how it treats thrombocytopenia.
What to Know About Empaveli for Treatment of Rare Kidney Disease Empaveli is a complement inhibitor. Hereâ s how it treats complement 3 glomerulopathy (C3G) and primary immune-complex membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (IC-MPGN).
Empaveli is a complement inhibitor. Hereâ s how it treats complement 3 glomerulopathy (C3G) and primary immune-complex membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (IC-MPGN).
What Is Hyperaldosteronism? Hyperaldosteronism is when your adrenal glands make too much aldosterone hormone. Learn about the causes, symptoms, and treatment options for this condition today.
Hyperaldosteronism is when your adrenal glands make too much aldosterone hormone. Learn about the causes, symptoms, and treatment options for this condition today.
What Is Erythrocytosis? Erythrocytosis is when you have more red blood cells than normal. Learn more about what causes it, symptoms of erythrocytosis, and how it s treated.
Erythrocytosis is when you have more red blood cells than normal. Learn more about what causes it, symptoms of erythrocytosis, and how it s treated.
What Is Trench Foot? Learn about the causes, symptoms, and treatment of trench foot in this general overview. Explore the history of this condition and how itâ s treated today.
Learn about the causes, symptoms, and treatment of trench foot in this general overview. Explore the history of this condition and how itâ s treated today.
Primary Immune Complex Membranoproliferative Glomerulonephritis (IC-MPGN) What is primary immune complex membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (IC-MPGN)? Learn about symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, and tips for living with the condition.
What is primary immune complex membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (IC-MPGN)? Learn about symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, and tips for living with the condition.
What Is a Home Water Filtration System? A home water filtration system removes contaminants from tap water, improving taste, odor, and safety for drinking, cooking, and everyday use. Is it right for your home?
A home water filtration system removes contaminants from tap water, improving taste, odor, and safety for drinking, cooking, and everyday use. Is it right for your home?
The FDA Approval Journey for Pegcetacoplan for C3G and IC-MPGN Learn how the clinical trials process took pegcetacoplan from an untested drug in the lab to a breakthrough treatment for C3G and IC-MPGN.
Learn how the clinical trials process took pegcetacoplan from an untested drug in the lab to a breakthrough treatment for C3G and IC-MPGN.
Mean Corpuscular Volume (â MCV) Blood Test The MCV blood test measures the average size of red blood cells, helping diagnose anemia and other blood disorders when results are too high or low.
The MCV blood test measures the average size of red blood cells, helping diagnose anemia and other blood disorders when results are too high or low.
What to Know About Osteitis Pubis Osteitis pubis is a painful condition that causes inflammation around the center of the pelvis. Learn about its causes, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, and more
Osteitis pubis is a painful condition that causes inflammation around the center of the pelvis. Learn about its causes, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, and more
What Is Nutcracker Syndrome? Nutcracker syndrome is a condition that affects the left kidney vein. Get the facts about symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment.
Nutcracker syndrome is a condition that affects the left kidney vein. Get the facts about symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment.
WHIM Syndrome: Symptoms, Causes, Treatment Learn about WHIM syndrome, a rare genetic condition that weakens the immune system. Find out about symptoms, treatments, and ways to stay healthy.
Learn about WHIM syndrome, a rare genetic condition that weakens the immune system. Find out about symptoms, treatments, and ways to stay healthy.
Long-Chain Fatty Acid Oxidation Disorders (LC-FAODs): Symptoms, Causes, Treatment Long-chain fatty acid oxidation disorders (LC-FAODs) affect how your body uses food for energy. Hereâ s what to know if your child has one of these rare conditions.
Long-chain fatty acid oxidation disorders (LC-FAODs) affect how your body uses food for energy. Hereâ s what to know if your child has one of these rare conditions.
Vanrafia for Treatment of Immunoglobulin A Nephropathy Vanrafia is an endothelin receptor antagonist. Here s how it treats immunoglobulin A nephropathy.
Vanrafia is an endothelin receptor antagonist. Here s how it treats immunoglobulin A nephropathy.
Your Guide to Fabhalta for Complement 3 Glomerulopathy (C3G) Fabhalta is a complement factor B inhibitor. Hereâ s how it treats complement 3 glomerulopathy.
Fabhalta is a complement factor B inhibitor. Hereâ s how it treats complement 3 glomerulopathy.
Qfitlia: A New Hemophilia Treatment Qfitlia is a prescription medicine for hemophilia. Hereâ s how it prevents bleeding episodes.
Qfitlia is a prescription medicine for hemophilia. Hereâ s how it prevents bleeding episodes.
Methylene Blue 101: How It Works and Side Effects Methylene blue (ProvayBlue) is a medication that treats a rare blood condition called methemoglobinemia. Find out how it works, who itâ s for, side effects, and more.
Methylene blue (ProvayBlue) is a medication that treats a rare blood condition called methemoglobinemia. Find out how it works, who itâ s for, side effects, and more.
Biohacking: Types and Safety Considerations Discover the benefits and research behind biohacking, including types, safety considerations, and ways to improve your longevity.
Discover the benefits and research behind biohacking, including types, safety considerations, and ways to improve your longevity.
Your Guide to Xolremdi for WHIM Syndrome Xolremdi is an oral prescription medicine. Hereâ s how it treats WHIM syndrome.
Xolremdi is an oral prescription medicine. Hereâ s how it treats WHIM syndrome.
Managing Hemophilia With Alhemo Alhemo is a biologic medicine. Hereâ s how it treats hemophilia.
Alhemo is a biologic medicine. Hereâ s how it treats hemophilia.
MCHC Blood Test: What to Know The MCHC blood test measures the concentration of hemoglobin in red blood cells, helping diagnose anemia and other blood disorders.
The MCHC blood test measures the concentration of hemoglobin in red blood cells, helping diagnose anemia and other blood disorders.
Iron Infusion: Uses, Benefits, and Side Effects An iron infusion delivers iron directly into your bloodstream through an IV to treat severe iron deficiency or anemia faster than oral supplements.
An iron infusion delivers iron directly into your bloodstream through an IV to treat severe iron deficiency or anemia faster than oral supplements.
RDW Blood Test RDW (red cell distribution width) tests measure changes red blood cell size, helping diagnose anemia and other blood disorders.
RDW (red cell distribution width) tests measure changes red blood cell size, helping diagnose anemia and other blood disorders.
Stay Healthy on Dialysis With Chronic Kidney Disease Maximize your health and quality of life during dialysis by being proactive about your nutrition, fitness, and treatment plan.
Maximize your health and quality of life during dialysis by being proactive about your nutrition, fitness, and treatment plan.
What is American Sign Language (ASL)? American sign language (ASL) is a visual language using hand gestures, facial expressions, and body movements, primarily used by the Deaf community in North America.
American sign language (ASL) is a visual language using hand gestures, facial expressions, and body movements, primarily used by the Deaf community in North America.
Understanding Anemia -- Diagnosis and Treatment WebMD s guide to the diagnosis and treatment of various types of anemia.
WebMD s guide to the diagnosis and treatment of various types of anemia.
Vijoice for PROS: PIK3CA-Related Overgrowth Spectrum (PROS) Vijoice is a kinase inhibitor. Hereâ s how it treats PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum (PROS).
Vijoice is a kinase inhibitor. Hereâ s how it treats PIK3CA-related overgrowth spectrum (PROS).
Jynarque for Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) Jynarque is a prescription medicine. Hereâ s how it slows kidney decline in people with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD).
Jynarque is a prescription medicine. Hereâ s how it slows kidney decline in people with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD).
How Nplate Works for Immune Thrombocytopenia (ITP) Nplate is a platelet booster. Hereâ s how it treats immune thrombocytopenia (ITP).
Nplate is a platelet booster. Hereâ s how it treats immune thrombocytopenia (ITP).
Altuviiio for Hemophilia A Altuviiio is a once-weekly factor VIII product. Hereâ s how it treats hemophilia A.
Altuviiio is a once-weekly factor VIII product. Hereâ s how it treats hemophilia A.
MTHFR Gene Mutation: Tests, Symptoms, and Treatment MTHFR gene mutation affects folate metabolism, linked to higher risk of cardiovascular issues, blood clots, and certain birth defects. It influences methylation and homocysteine levels.
MTHFR gene mutation affects folate metabolism, linked to higher risk of cardiovascular issues, blood clots, and certain birth defects. It influences methylation and homocysteine levels.
Empaveli for Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria: What You Need to Know Epaveli is a complement inhibitor. Hereâ s how it treats paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
Epaveli is a complement inhibitor. Hereâ s how it treats paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
Kerendia for Chronic Kidney Disease Kerendia is a nonsteroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist. Hereâ s how it treats chronic kidney disease.
Kerendia is a nonsteroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist. Hereâ s how it treats chronic kidney disease.
The Importance of Self-Care With aHUS Self-care if you have aHUS is just as important as the medical care you need.
Self-care if you have aHUS is just as important as the medical care you need.
Cold Plunge: Is It Safe? A cold plunge involves immersing in cold water (50 F or below) to boost circulation, reduce inflammation, and enhance recovery, often used in sports or wellness routines.
A cold plunge involves immersing in cold water (50 F or below) to boost circulation, reduce inflammation, and enhance recovery, often used in sports or wellness routines.
Lokelma for High Potassium (Hyperkalemia) Lokelma is a phosphate binder medicine. Hereâ s how it treats high potassium levels (hyperkalemia).
Lokelma is a phosphate binder medicine. Hereâ s how it treats high potassium levels (hyperkalemia).