Overview What Is Coronavirus? Variants Long COVID
Diagnosis and Treatment Diagnosis Treatment
Whatâ s My Childâ s Risk of Getting the Coronavirus?
Children can get the coronavirus that causes COVID-19, but their symptoms tend to be milder than adultsâ symptoms, and in many cases, they may have no symptoms at all. Their risk of getting COVID-19 is about the same as that of adults. The risk can be drastically reduced if your child receives the COVID-19 vaccine.
COVID-19 may cause more serious illness in children who have certain medical conditions and in babies younger than 12 months.
In some cases, children develop multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C), which is a serious condition that requires medical attention (more below).
Some very simple and effective ways to help prevent your child from catching or spreading COVID-19 are:
Follow CDC recommendations for prevention measures.
Have them vaccinated if they are 6 months or older.
Are COVID-19 Symptoms Different in Children and Adults?
When children and teens get sick with COVID-19, their symptoms appear to be similar to adults. There have been fewer hospitalizations among people in the U.S. under the age of 19. Research shows that over 90% of children who get sick have very mild to moderate cold-like symptoms that include:
Some children and teens have been hospitalized with a condition called multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) or pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome (PMIS). It can happen 2-6 weeks after a COVID-19 infection, even if the case was mild. Symptoms include fever, belly pain, vomiting, diarrhea, rash , headache , and confusion. Theyâ re similar to those of toxic shock syndrome or Kawasaki disease , which causes inflamed blood vessels in children.
Coronavirus in Children With Medical Conditions
Some children may be at higher risk for more severe disease if they have other medical conditions such as:
How Can I Protect My Children From the Coronavirus?
The CDC has recommended that everyone 6 months and older should get the COVID-19 vaccine to protect against the coronavirus. The Pfizer and Moderna vaccines areÂ approved for ages 6-months and older.Â
But getting the vaccine does not ensure that your child will not get infected. Itâ s important to do everything you can to protect your child and the rest of your family from getting contagious diseases. Here are ways to cut their risk of illness:
Wash hands often. All kids should wash their hands:
After they sneeze , cough, or blow their nose
Soap and water are best. Make sure they lather the backs of their hands, between their fingers, and under their nails for at least 20 seconds (the same amount of time it takes to sing â Happy Birthdayâ two times). If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol.
Keep your kids away from others who are ill. And if your child has cold-like symptoms, keep them home. Teach them to cough and sneeze into a tissue that they toss after each use, or into their arm or elbow instead of their hands.
Clean your home regularly. Disinfect high-touch surfaces like toilets, sinks, doorknobs, light switches, handles, smartphones, tablets, and TV remotes every day. You can use most regular household cleaners, or make your own by mixing a quarter cup of bleach with a gallon of water. If your child has a favorite stuffed animal or plush item, wash it frequently at the highest possible temperature.
Whatâ s the Treatment for Young Children With COVID-19?
Thereâ s one FDA-approved COVID-19 treatment for certain kids under 12 years old. Itâ s a shot called remdesivir ( Veklury ). Itâ s for children 28 days of age and older who weigh about 7 pounds at least, and are either:
Not hospitalized but have mild to moderate COVID-19 and are at high risk for the disease becoming severe
Remdesivir can cause side effects. Thereâ s a chance it could raise a childâ s levels of liver enzymes , which may be a sign of liver injury. It could also trigger an allergic reaction , which may include signs like:
Changes in blood pressure and heart rate
Swelling of the lips, around the eyes , under the skin, or other body parts
Get medical help right away if you think your child is having side effects. Dial 911 if theyâ re having trouble breathing .
Paxlovid is used to treat adults and children 12 and older (weighing at least 88 pounds) who have mild-to-moderate COVID-19 and high risk of the disease becoming severe. Paxlovid should be taken as soon as possible after youâ re diagnosed and within 5 days of your symptoms starting.
Remdesivir and Paxlovid are not substitutes for the COVID-19 vaccine in children who are eligible. Your child should still get the COVID vaccine if they are 6-months or older.
What to Do if Your Child Gets Sick With COVID-19
If your child has symptoms that you think might be COVID-19, call a doctor. They can tell you what to do and whether the doctor needs to see your child in person.Â
In the event that your child has COVID-19, theyâ ll likely stay at home to recover. Your child should rest and drink plenty of fluids. Never use aspirin in children younger than 19. It increases their risk of a serious condition called Reyeâ s syndrome. You may want to try giving your child an over-the-counter pain reliever thatâ s a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID), such as ibuprofen or naproxen . Â Acetaminophen may be a safer option. To make sure the rest of the family doesnâ t get sick:
Separate them. Your child should stay away from the other people in your home -- ideally, in a specific room and bathroom. They shouldnâ t snuggle or kiss family pets, either. If your child has COVID-19, they should wear a face mask when theyâ re around other people. If that makes it harder for them to breathe , or they get upset, you can instead wear one when youâ re with them.
Donâ t share personal items with them. This includes things like drinking glasses, towels, and bedding.
Clean and disinfect. If your sick child is old enough to clean high-touch areas like phones, doorknobs, and toilets themselves, let them. Otherwise, do it yourself but wear a mask.
Track their symptoms. Call 911 if your child has trouble breathing, has chest pressure or pain, or seems confused.
Keep them isolated even if they seem better. Your child can be around other people once they have had a full day with no fever -- without the use of fever-reducing medication -- and their other symptoms have improved. They need to keep wearing a mask when theyâ re around other people for another 5 days.