Living With Understanding Blood Sugar Diet Exercise Better Living Complications
Type 2 Diabetes Overview Symptoms Causes Diagnosis Tests Prevention Treatment Living Managing Complications Related Diseases
Type 1 Diabetes Overview Treating Managing Complications Related Conditions
When you have diabetes, sick days often mean more than a runny nose and sneezing. An illness like a cold, the flu, or any condition that makes you throw up or gives you diarrhea can also boost your blood sugar. So can an infection.
That means you have to stay on top of your blood sugar levels. Here are some guidelines:
Test for ketones if you have type 1 diabetes and your sugar level is above 240mg/dL -- or if your doctor tells you to. Ketones are a form of waste that people with type 1 make when theyâ re under stress (like an illness). Call the doctor if you find ketones in your urine. Depending on how sick you are, they may suggest you go to the emergency room.
Drink liquids if you canâ t keep solid food down. Have one cup of liquid every hour while youâ re awake to prevent dehydration . If you canâ t hold down liquids, you may need to go to the emergency room or hospital.
Donâ t stop taking insulin, even if you canâ t eat solid food. You may need to eat or drink something with sugar so that your blood sugar doesn t drop too low.
You may need to stop taking medicines by mouth for type 2 diabetes while youâ re sick. Check with your doctor if youâ re not sure what to do.
If you need an over-the-counter drug to control symptoms like cough and nasal congestion, ask your doctor or pharmacist for a list of sugar-free products.
Eat or drink 30 to 50 grams of carbohydrates every 3 to 4 hours. That will keep your body nourished, stop it from making ketones, and prevent your blood sugar from dropping too low.
If youâ re having trouble eating, try bland foods like the ones listed below. Each equals one carbohydrate choice.
1/2 cup regular soft drink, like 7-up or Sprite
For additional liquids to stay hydrated, choose calorie-free liquids like water, diet soda, clear broth or bouillon.
Your blood sugar stays higher than 180 mg/dL or lower than 70 mg/dL.
You canâ t keep liquids or solids down.