What Is HIV? If you re just beginning to learn about HIV and AIDS, this is a good place to start.
If you re just beginning to learn about HIV and AIDS, this is a good place to start.
HIV vs. AIDS HIV is a virus. It may cause AIDS after youâ ve been infected for several years and itâ s weakened your immune system.
HIV is a virus. It may cause AIDS after youâ ve been infected for several years and itâ s weakened your immune system.
Types and Strains of HIV There are two main types of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) -- HIV-1 and HIV-2. Both can lead to AIDS.
There are two main types of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) -- HIV-1 and HIV-2. Both can lead to AIDS.
The Stages of HIV Untreated HIV generally progresses through different stages and, eventually, to AIDS.
Untreated HIV generally progresses through different stages and, eventually, to AIDS.
What Are the Symptoms of HIV? Learn about early and late symptoms of HIV and AIDS.
Learn about early and late symptoms of HIV and AIDS.
Don t Wait for HIV Symptoms HIV doesnâ t affect everyone the same way. Some people notice signs soon after they get the virus. Others donâ t.
HIV doesnâ t affect everyone the same way. Some people notice signs soon after they get the virus. Others donâ t.
HIV Symptoms in Men Most of the time, the signs of HIV are the same for men and women. But there are a few symptoms that are unique to men.
Most of the time, the signs of HIV are the same for men and women. But there are a few symptoms that are unique to men.
HIV Symptoms in Women The symptoms of HIV are mostly the same for men and women. But there are a few signs that happen only in women.
The symptoms of HIV are mostly the same for men and women. But there are a few signs that happen only in women.
What Are Your Chances of Getting HIV? HIV can affect anyone, no matter your age, race, ethnicity, or sexual orientation. But certain things make your risk go up.
HIV can affect anyone, no matter your age, race, ethnicity, or sexual orientation. But certain things make your risk go up.
Needle Stick Injury: What to Do About 1 out of 300 health care workers accidentally stuck with a needle from someone with HIV get infected.
About 1 out of 300 health care workers accidentally stuck with a needle from someone with HIV get infected.
HIV: What to Know About Needle Sharing Needle sharing is the second biggest risk for HIV. About 1 in 10 new HIV infections happen in people who inject drugs.
Needle sharing is the second biggest risk for HIV. About 1 in 10 new HIV infections happen in people who inject drugs.
Can You Spread HIV With an Undetectable Viral Load? When you have HIV, your viral load is the amount of virus in your blood and body fluids.
Can You Spread HIV With an Undetectable Viral Load?
When you have HIV, your viral load is the amount of virus in your blood and body fluids.
HIV Screening: What to Know Research shows that routine HIV screening can help curb the virus from spreading.
Research shows that routine HIV screening can help curb the virus from spreading.
First Steps if You Think You ve Been Exposed to HIV Exposure doesnâ t automatically mean infection. But you should act quickly to lower your chances of getting HIV.
First Steps if You Think You ve Been Exposed to HIV
Exposure doesnâ t automatically mean infection. But you should act quickly to lower your chances of getting HIV.
HIV Testing HIV testing, also called HIV screening, is the only way to know if you have the virus.
HIV testing, also called HIV screening, is the only way to know if you have the virus.
HIV: How to Get a Free Test HIV tests are now easy to get and affordable. But if money is tight, a free HIV test is the way to go.
HIV tests are now easy to get and affordable. But if money is tight, a free HIV test is the way to go.
What to Do After Being Diagnosed as HIV-Positive If you ve just found out that you re HIV-positive, you may feel overwhelmed, fearful, and alone. But youâ re far from alone.
What to Do After Being Diagnosed as HIV-Positive
If you ve just found out that you re HIV-positive, you may feel overwhelmed, fearful, and alone. But youâ re far from alone.
Newly Diagnosed: What You Need to Know About HIV Here are answers to some of the most frequently asked questions about a new HIV diagnosis.
Newly Diagnosed: What You Need to Know About HIV
Here are answers to some of the most frequently asked questions about a new HIV diagnosis.
Next Steps After an HIV-Positive Diagnosis Finding out you have HIV can jolt your world. Fortunately, it can be a manageable long-term condition.
Next Steps After an HIV-Positive Diagnosis
Finding out you have HIV can jolt your world. Fortunately, it can be a manageable long-term condition.
Questions to Ask Your Doctor About HIV/AIDS A diagnosis of HIV or AIDS can be overwhelming. You might forget to ask your doctor about things that have come up.
Questions to Ask Your Doctor About HIV/AIDS
A diagnosis of HIV or AIDS can be overwhelming. You might forget to ask your doctor about things that have come up.
How to Treat HIV There s no cure for HIV, but treatment options are much better than they were a few decades ago.
There s no cure for HIV, but treatment options are much better than they were a few decades ago.
HIV Treatment Team Many different medical professionals provide care, comfort, and treatment for people with HIV.
Many different medical professionals provide care, comfort, and treatment for people with HIV.
What to Know About the CD4:CD8 Ratio Test The CD4:CD8 ratio test judges the strength of your immune system and if you re at risk for opportunistic infections.
What to Know About the CD4:CD8 Ratio Test
The CD4:CD8 ratio test judges the strength of your immune system and if you re at risk for opportunistic infections.
What Does an HIV Treatment Plan Look Like? With an Â HIV diagnosis, youâ ll want to start treatment right away. Early treatment gives you the chance to stay healthy.
What Does an HIV Treatment Plan Look Like?
With an Â HIV diagnosis, youâ ll want to start treatment right away. Early treatment gives you the chance to stay healthy.
Effects of HIV on the Body As HIV weakens your natural defenses, you might notice signs all over your body.
As HIV weakens your natural defenses, you might notice signs all over your body.
HIV and Heart Disease: What s the Link? Youâ re more likely to have heart disease if you have the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which causes AIDS.
Youâ re more likely to have heart disease if you have the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which causes AIDS.
HIV and High Cholesterol Â If you have HIV, your risk of high cholesterol goes up. We need more research to understand the link between the two.
Â If you have HIV, your risk of high cholesterol goes up. We need more research to understand the link between the two.
HIV and High Blood Pressure Without HIV, thereâ s about a 30% risk youâ ll get hypertension sometime in life. If youâ re HIV-positive, that goes up to 35%.
Without HIV, thereâ s about a 30% risk youâ ll get hypertension sometime in life. If youâ re HIV-positive, that goes up to 35%.
What Opportunistic Infections Do You Get With HIV? Untreated HIV, over the course of years, will harm your immune system and can lead to opportunistic infections.
What Opportunistic Infections Do You Get With HIV?
Untreated HIV, over the course of years, will harm your immune system and can lead to opportunistic infections.
Chronic HIV Infection: What to Know The illness known as HIV/AIDS happens in three stages: acute HIV infection, chronic HIV infection, and AIDS.
The illness known as HIV/AIDS happens in three stages: acute HIV infection, chronic HIV infection, and AIDS.
Pneumocystis Pneumonia (PCP) Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) is a serious infection that causes inflammation and fluid buildup in your lungs.
Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) is a serious infection that causes inflammation and fluid buildup in your lungs.
Tuberculosis in People With HIV Someone infected with both HIV and tuberculosis is at least 10 times more likely to develop active tuberculosis.
Someone infected with both HIV and tuberculosis is at least 10 times more likely to develop active tuberculosis.
Dangerous Complications of HIV and AIDS If you live with an advanced case of HIV, you can be an easy target for different infections and diseases.
If you live with an advanced case of HIV, you can be an easy target for different infections and diseases.
Kaposiâ s Sarcoma (KS) Kaposiâ s sarcoma is a cancer in which tumors grow below the surface of your skin and in your mouth, nose, eyes, and anus.
Kaposiâ s sarcoma is a cancer in which tumors grow below the surface of your skin and in your mouth, nose, eyes, and anus.
Non-Hodgkinâ s Lymphoma (NHL) and HIV NHL can happen more quickly when you have a weakened immune system, so people with HIV are more likely to get it.
NHL can happen more quickly when you have a weakened immune system, so people with HIV are more likely to get it.
What is Lymphocytopenia? Lymphocytopenia is a condition in which your blood does not have a sufficient amount of white blood cells.
Lymphocytopenia is a condition in which your blood does not have a sufficient amount of white blood cells.
HIV and Lifestyle Changes You can live a normal life with HIV. With your doctorâ s help and advice, you can take steps to stay as healthy as possible.
You can live a normal life with HIV. With your doctorâ s help and advice, you can take steps to stay as healthy as possible.
Nutrition and HIV/AIDS Tuning up your diet can improve your health and help you feel better. Here are a few tips to start.
Tuning up your diet can improve your health and help you feel better. Here are a few tips to start.
Garlic and HIV: What You Should Know If you take a certain drug for HIV, there s a chance that garlic supplements could stop it from working well.
If you take a certain drug for HIV, there s a chance that garlic supplements could stop it from working well.
HIV: What to Know About Taking Vitamins and Supplements Thereâ s evidence that some supplements may be beneficial for people with HIV. But some may be especially risky.
HIV: What to Know About Taking Vitamins and Supplements
Thereâ s evidence that some supplements may be beneficial for people with HIV. But some may be especially risky.
Safe Sex When Youâ re HIV-Positive If you are HIV-positive, you can still have sex. In some cases, you can even have unprotected sex without putting your partner at risk.
If you are HIV-positive, you can still have sex. In some cases, you can even have unprotected sex without putting your partner at risk.
How to Protect Your Partner When You Have HIV Learning that you have HIV doesnâ t have to bring your sex life to a stop.
How to Protect Your Partner When You Have HIV
Learning that you have HIV doesnâ t have to bring your sex life to a stop.
Tips for Dating When You re HIV-Positive You can still have relationships and a sex life when you re HIV-positive. You just need to be a little more careful.
Tips for Dating When You re HIV-Positive
You can still have relationships and a sex life when you re HIV-positive. You just need to be a little more careful.
HIV in Men Who Have Sex With Men: What to Know If you are a man who has sex with men, you might be at greater risk forgetting HIV, the virus causes AIDS.
HIV in Men Who Have Sex With Men: What to Know
If you are a man who has sex with men, you might be at greater risk forgetting HIV, the virus causes AIDS.
HIV-Positive: Know Your Rights and Find Support Many groups can help connect you to medical, financial, and emotional support if you have HIV.
HIV-Positive: Know Your Rights and Find Support
Many groups can help connect you to medical, financial, and emotional support if you have HIV.
What to Do About Discrimination Because of HIV All too often, people with HIV become targets of judgment, when what they need is support and compassion.
What to Do About Discrimination Because of HIV
All too often, people with HIV become targets of judgment, when what they need is support and compassion.
Federal Disability Insurance When You Have AIDS What do you do when you can t hold a job because of AIDS? Disability insurance pays you regularly when you can t work.
Federal Disability Insurance When You Have AIDS
What do you do when you can t hold a job because of AIDS? Disability insurance pays you regularly when you can t work.
HIV Disclosure: What Does the Law Say? Your HIV status is personal medical information. There are laws that protect the privacy of your health information.
Your HIV status is personal medical information. There are laws that protect the privacy of your health information.
How Can You Prevent an HIV Infection? Condoms are the best way to prevent HIV because the virus can t pass through the barrier. You must use them correctly.
Condoms are the best way to prevent HIV because the virus can t pass through the barrier. You must use them correctly.
Dental Dam A dental dam is a square, stretchy sheet made from latex or polyurethane. It blocks the body fluids that can spread STDs.
A dental dam is a square, stretchy sheet made from latex or polyurethane. It blocks the body fluids that can spread STDs.
HIV: What Is Treatment as Prevention? HIV treatment as prevention means a person living with HIV takes meds to prevent passing the virus to someone without it.
HIV treatment as prevention means a person living with HIV takes meds to prevent passing the virus to someone without it.
FAQ: Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV PrEP means pre-exposure prophylaxis. It s a pill or injection you take when you don t have HIV but are likely to get it.
FAQ: Pre-Exposure Prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV
PrEP means pre-exposure prophylaxis. It s a pill or injection you take when you don t have HIV but are likely to get it.
Questions for Your Doctor About HIV Whether you re newly diagnosed with HIV or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Whether you re newly diagnosed with HIV or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Sign up for our free Good Health Newsletter
A Pictorial Timeline of the HIV/AIDS Pandemic A historical overview of the AIDS pandemic from the first human case to the present.
A Pictorial Timeline of the HIV/AIDS Pandemic
A historical overview of the AIDS pandemic from the first human case to the present.
What Affects Your HIV Treatment? With the right habits, you can keep your HIV medicines working well. Avoid things that can change how effective the drugs are. WebMD s slideshow can help you know what you can and cannot do to make your treatment as helpful as it can be.
With the right habits, you can keep your HIV medicines working well. Avoid things that can change how effective the drugs are. WebMD s slideshow can help you know what you can and cannot do to make your treatment as helpful as it can be.
HIV and AIDS Rashes and Skin Conditions A weakened immune system can let in the germs that cause skin conditions. Learn which skin problems are most common in people with HIV and AIDS.
A weakened immune system can let in the germs that cause skin conditions. Learn which skin problems are most common in people with HIV and AIDS.
HIV PrEP: An Expertâ s Insights on a New Option Hear from an expert how lenacapavir (Yeztugo) can lower your HIV risk, possible side effects, and insights about this twice a year PrEP injection.
HIV PrEP: An Expertâ s Insights on a New Option
Hear from an expert how lenacapavir (Yeztugo) can lower your HIV risk, possible side effects, and insights about this twice a year PrEP injection.
You can also search by physician, practice, or hospital name