Pancreatic cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancerous) cells form in the tissues of the pancreas . The pancreas is a gland located behind the stomach and in front of the spine . The pancreas produces digestive juices and hormones that regulate blood sugar . Cells called exocrine pancreas cells produce the digestive juices, while cells called endocrine pancreas cells produce the hormones. The majority of pancreatic cancers start in the exocrine cells.
Jaundice (yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes )
Pain in the upper or middle abdomen and back
The factors which could put you at risk for developing pancreatic cancer include:
Chronic pancreatitis ( inflammation of the pancreas)
Inherited conditions (including hereditary pancreatitis )
After taking down your health history and performing a physical exam , the doctor may order several tests to determine the cause of your problem or extent of the condition, including:
Laparoscopy (surgical procedure to look at organs)
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)
Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC; procedure used to X-ray liver and bile ducts)
Biopsy (removal of tissue to view it under a microscope)
There are various treatments for pancreatic cancer, including surgery, chemotherapy , immunotherapy, radiation therapy, and targeted therapy . Chemotherapy uses drugs to treat cancer, while radiation therapy uses X-rays or other kinds of radiation to kill cancer cells. Surgery can be used to remove a tumor or to treat symptoms of pancreatic cancer . Targeted therapy slows the growth and spread of cancer by targeting proteins or other substances in or on cancer cells. Immunotherapy increases the ability of the immune system to find and attack cancer cells.
What Is the Outlook for Pancreatic Cancer?
About 44% of people with  localized pancreatic cancer that has not spread beyond the pancreas are still living five years after diagnosis. About 3% of people whose cancer has spread to distant sites in the body are still alive five years after being diagnosed.