Skin Infections Bacterial Skin Infections Fungal Skin Infections Viral Skin Infections
Roseola is a commonÂ viral infection that mainly affects children under age 2, usually between the ages of 6 and 12 months. Itâ s so common that almost all children in the U.S. have had it by the time they turn 2. Although itâ s rare, older children and adults can also get it.Â
Doctors or other health care professionals might call it roseola infantum or exanthema subitum. You may also hear people calling roseola sixth disease. The simple explanation for that is that roseola was the sixth childhood rash (like measles) that scientists named.
Most of the time, roseola is nothing to worry about, and kids get better on their own.
Roseola is an infection caused by one of two viruses. Most often, itâ s caused by human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6). Occasionally, itâ s caused by human herpesvirus 7 (HHV-7). When someone who has the virus talks, coughs, or sneezes, they spread infected droplets into the air, which your child can breathe in. These droplets can also land on surfaces, like a tabletop or a toy, contaminating them. If your child touches the contaminated area and then brings their hand to their nose or mouth, they can become infected too.Â
Unfortunately, it can take up to 15 days after getting infected to start showing symptoms -- and someone can be contagious before they are sick. Thatâ s one reason why roseola can spread so easily.
Older children and adults can get roseola, but itâ s rare. This is probably because once youâ ve had roseola, itâ s unlikely that you will get it again. Youâ ll have some immunity against it. Since most children in the U.S. have roseola by the time theyâ re 2 years old, itâ s likely you had also it and are now immune.
There is an exception to the immunity though. If you have a weakened immune system (areÂ immunosuppressed or immunocompromised), you could get roseola again.
Your child might not have any symptoms for 5-15 days after getting the virus that causes roseola. When symptoms do appear, the first thing youâ ll usually notice is a sudden, Â high fever (over 103 F) that lasts or can come and go for 3-7 days. Other symptoms can include:
Swelling around their eyes or on the eyelids, droopy eyelids
SwollenÂ lymph nodes in their neck or back of the head
Small red spots (can be pink) in the throat
About one-quarter of people with roseola develop a flat, spotty, reddish Â rash after the fever goes away. It first appears on the chest, back, and belly, and then spreads to the neck and trunk. It doesnâ t itch and may last just a few hours or a few days. Some people get the rash without having a fever.
There are several childhood infections that cause rashes, and it can be hard to tell them apart sometimes.Â Measles is a much more severe infection than roseola, and itâ s much more contagious. If youâ re not sure about what might be causing your childâ s rash, speak with your doctor as soon as possible.Â There are differences between the two that you can look for:
Where the rash starts. If your child has roseola and develops a rash, it usually starts on the chest, back, and belly, and then it spreads. If your child has measles, the rash would start on their face and then spread downward.
Color of the rash. A roseola rash is red or pink. A measles rash is red or red-brown.
How the rash looks. If your child has a roseola rash, youâ ll see that each spot is separate -- the spots donâ t touch each other. The spots in a measles rash, however, join together.
Peeling. A roseola rash fades away while a measles rash gets flaky or peels.
Most times, doctors can tell if your child has roseola by looking at them and reviewing their symptoms. If thereâ s a rash, the doctor will look at it to make sure itâ s not caused by another virus, like measles. Blood tests arenâ t usually done for a roseola diagnosis, but they can be, especially if your doctor wants to rule out another illness.
Thereâ s no treatment for roseola, and since it s caused by a virus, Â antibiotics wonâ t help (theyâ re only for bacterial infections). Your childâ s doctor will likely recommendÂ  treating the symptoms to help make your child more comfortable. If your child has a health condition or takes medications that suppress their immune system, speak with your childâ s doctor as soon as possible after they show signs of being ill because the doctor might recommend extra treatment.Â
If your child has a high fever or is uncomfortable, you can:
GiveÂ them acetaminophen orÂ ibuprofen.Â (Children under 6 months shouldnâ t be given ibuprofen unless their doctor says itâ s OK to do so. And donâ t giveÂ aspirin to a child or teen under 18; it can cause a rare but serious condition calledÂ Reyeâ s syndrome .)
Make sure they drink plenty of fluids so they donâ t get dehydrated.
Dress them in lightweight clothing so they donâ t get too warm.
There really isnâ t anything to do for the rash since itâ s not itchy or painful.
If your child develops other symptoms or becomes very sick, their doctor might recommend an antiviral medication -- eitherÂ foscarnet orÂ ganciclovir .
Roseola is contagious, so you should keep your child away from others, at least until the fever goes away. Once itâ s been gone for at least 24 hours, they can play with other kids, even if they still have a rash.
Thereâ s no medical treatment for roseola, but there are some things you can do at home to help keep your child more comfortable.
Keep your child hydrated. Here are some helpful tips:
If your child is breastfeeding or bottle feeding, try nursing or offering the bottle more often, for shorter periods if needed.
Offer drinks in small cups so the amount doesnâ t seem overwhelming.
Offer rehydration solutions, likeÂ Pedialyte , that come in frozen pops as well as liquid.
Some kids love to eat flavored gelatin, which is hydrating.
Make sure they get plenty of rest. Resting is the best way to wait out a virus. If your child has a fever, cover them lightly -- donâ t pile on the blankets.
Keep them comfortable. A cool cloth on the forehead can help your child feel less feverish and more comfortable. It used to be advised to give kids a cold bath if they had a fever, but thatâ s not a good idea and isnâ t recommended anymore. Instead, you can give your child a sponge bath with a lukewarm cloth.
Most children recover from roseola in about a week. The fever can last from 3 to 5 days. If they get a rash, this can last anywhere from a few hours to a few days.Â
If your child seems to be getting worse or has a seizure, take your child to an emergency department or call 911. If your child isnâ t better after a week, contact your doctor.
Most children recover from roseola infection within a week without any complications. But, as with all illnesses, there can be some complications.Â
About 10% to 15% of young children who have roseola haveÂ febrile seizures . These are seizures that are caused by the high fever. They usually last from a few seconds to 15 minutes. Some may last longer. During one of these seizures, your child may:
Jerk or twitch their arms, legs, and/or face
Febrile seizures can be frightening, but they are typically harmless. But if the seizure lasts longer than 5 minutes, you should call emergency medical services. In either case, contact your doctor right away, even if the seizure is short.Â
More serious complications are rare. If they do happen, it s usually among children who have problems with their immune system, such as those with cancer or who have had an organ transplant. These include:
Encephalitis (including cerebellitis), inflammation of the brain including in the cerebellum
Meningoencephalitis, inflammation or infection of the layers protecting the brain and spinal cord (meninges)
Rhombencephalitis, inflammation of the brainstem and cerebellum
Myocarditis Â inflammation of the heart muscle
Pneumonitis , inflammation of the lung tissue
Thrombocytopenia , low levels of platelets in the blood
Guillain-Barre syndrome, an autoimmune disorder that affects the nervous system
Hepatitis , inflammation of the liver tissue
Bone marrow failure, which means the bone marrow canâ t make enough platelets, red blood cells, or white blood cells
Unlike some other childhood diseases like measles orÂ chickenpox that haveÂ vaccines , there is no roseola vaccine. The only way you can try to prevent roseola is by good and regular hand washing and avoiding people who are infected with the virus.
Roseola is such a common childhood viral infection that almost all children in the U.S. have had it by the time they turn 2 years old. There is no roseola treatment and most children recover from the virus quickly. Although complications are rare, around 10% to 15% of children who have high fevers from roseola have febrile seizures. If you are worried about your child or they have seizures with fever, contact your doctor as soon as possible or go to the emergency room.
Because of the rash and fever, some people might mistake roseola for measles. However, the rash is different and measles is a much more serious infection.
It is possible for an adult to get roseola from a child, but itâ s rare. Most adults had roseola when they were young, and this makes them immune to getting it again. However, if the adult has a suppressed immune system, they could get it a second time.
Children with roseola shouldnâ t go to school because they can spread the infection. Once the fever is gone, they should be OK to go back to school.
Is it OK to bathe a baby if they have roseola?
Itâ s best to give a sponge bath with lukewarm water to help your baby be more comfortable if they have roseola.
Roseola rashes arenâ t itchy or sore, so there is no need to soothe them.