11 Steps for Choosing the Right Health Plan
Health insurance may seem expensive, but going without coverage can cost far more. Hereâ s how to find a plan that fits your needs and your budget.
What Is Diabetes? Diabetes is a number of diseases that involve problems with the hormone insulin. There is no cure for diabetes.
Diabetes is a number of diseases that involve problems with the hormone insulin. There is no cure for diabetes.
What Are the Different Types of Diabetes? There are three major types of diabetes: type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, and gestational diabetes.
What Are the Different Types of Diabetes?
There are three major types of diabetes: type 1 diabetes, type 2 diabetes, and gestational diabetes.
What Is Diabetes Insipidus? Diabetes insipidus causes you to have an almost unquenchable thirst and your body to make a lot of urine.
Diabetes insipidus causes you to have an almost unquenchable thirst and your body to make a lot of urine.
What Is Gestagenic Diabetes Insipidus? Gestational DI, or gestagenic diabetes insipidus, is a rare disorder that happens in pregnancy, usually in the third trimester.
Gestational DI, or gestagenic diabetes insipidus, is a rare disorder that happens in pregnancy, usually in the third trimester.
Signs Symptoms of Diabetes The warning signs of diabetes can be so mild that you don t notice them. That s especially true of type 2 diabetes.
The warning signs of diabetes can be so mild that you don t notice them. That s especially true of type 2 diabetes.
Diagnosis of Diabetes Diabetes diagnostic tests include a fasting plasma glucose test, oral glucose tolerance test, or random plasma glucose test.
Diabetes diagnostic tests include a fasting plasma glucose test, oral glucose tolerance test, or random plasma glucose test.
Oral Glucose Tolerance Testing An oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) shows how well your body handles sugar from foods.
An oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) shows how well your body handles sugar from foods.
Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) Testing The hemoglobin A1c test is an important blood test that shows how well your diabetes is being controlled.
The hemoglobin A1c test is an important blood test that shows how well your diabetes is being controlled.
Understanding Your Diabetes Treatment Options You cannot treat diabetes on your own. Your doctor will help you make a diabetes treatment plan that is right for you.
Understanding Your Diabetes Treatment Options
You cannot treat diabetes on your own. Your doctor will help you make a diabetes treatment plan that is right for you.
Your Diabetes Care Team Different doctors can help you manage different aspects of your diabetes. Find out who you need on your team.
Different doctors can help you manage different aspects of your diabetes. Find out who you need on your team.
Types of Insulin Many forms of insulin treat diabetes, including rapid-acting, short-acting, intermediate-acting, long-acting, and pre-mixed.
Many forms of insulin treat diabetes, including rapid-acting, short-acting, intermediate-acting, long-acting, and pre-mixed.
Toujeo Insulin for Type 2 Diabetes Toujeo is an injectable insulin medication for the treatment of diabetes (type 1 or type 2) in people who are 6 years old and older. It is a long-acting form of insulin, which allows it to last for a long time in the body to help control blood sugars.
Toujeo is an injectable insulin medication for the treatment of diabetes (type 1 or type 2) in people who are 6 years old and older. It is a long-acting form of insulin, which allows it to last for a long time in the body to help control blood sugars.
High Blood Sugar (Hyperglycemia) Blood sugar control is at the center of any diabetes treatment plan. High blood sugar, or hyperglycemia, is a major concern.
Blood sugar control is at the center of any diabetes treatment plan. High blood sugar, or hyperglycemia, is a major concern.
Low Blood Sugar (Hypoglycemia) People with diabetes get hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) when their bodies don t have enough sugar to use as fuel.
People with diabetes get hypoglycemia (low blood sugar) when their bodies don t have enough sugar to use as fuel.
Continuous Glucose Monitoring Continuous glucose monitors are FDA-approved systems that track your blood sugar levels day and night.
Continuous glucose monitors are FDA-approved systems that track your blood sugar levels day and night.
How and When to Test Your Blood Sugar Most people with diabetes need to check their glucose levels regularly. The results help you and your doctor manage those levels.
Most people with diabetes need to check their glucose levels regularly. The results help you and your doctor manage those levels.
Nerve Pain and Diabetes Nerve pain caused by diabetes, known as diabetic peripheral neuropathy, can be severe, constant, and hard to treat.
Nerve pain caused by diabetes, known as diabetic peripheral neuropathy, can be severe, constant, and hard to treat.
Skin Conditions and Diabetes Skin conditions related to diabetes are common. Most can be successfully treated before they turn into a serious problem.
Skin conditions related to diabetes are common. Most can be successfully treated before they turn into a serious problem.
Kidney Disease and Diabetes Diabetic nephropathy -- kidney disease that results from diabetes -- is the No. 1 cause of kidney failure.
Diabetic nephropathy -- kidney disease that results from diabetes -- is the No. 1 cause of kidney failure.
Infections and Diabetes Most infections in people with diabetes can be treated. But you have to be able to spot the symptoms. Learn what to look for.
Most infections in people with diabetes can be treated. But you have to be able to spot the symptoms. Learn what to look for.
What Is Type 2 Diabetes? Type 2 diabetes is a lifelong disease that keeps your body from using insulin the way it should.
Type 2 diabetes is a lifelong disease that keeps your body from using insulin the way it should.
Prediabetes (Borderline Diabetes) Prediabetes is when your blood sugar level is higher than it should be but not enough for your doctor to diagnose diabetes.
Prediabetes is when your blood sugar level is higher than it should be but not enough for your doctor to diagnose diabetes.
What is Insulin Resistance? Insulin resistance is when cells in your muscles, fat, and liver donâ t respond well to insulin.
Insulin resistance is when cells in your muscles, fat, and liver donâ t respond well to insulin.
Early Signs and Symptoms of Type 2 Diabetes You might not know that you have type 2 diabetes until it affects your health. Symptoms can come on slowly.
Early Signs and Symptoms of Type 2 Diabetes
You might not know that you have type 2 diabetes until it affects your health. Symptoms can come on slowly.
Type 1 Diabetes Type 1 diabetes is a condition in which your immune system destroys insulin-making cells in your pancreas.
Type 1 diabetes is a condition in which your immune system destroys insulin-making cells in your pancreas.
Might My Child Have Type 1 Diabetes? Know the symptoms of type 1 diabetes so you can help keep your child healthy.
Know the symptoms of type 1 diabetes so you can help keep your child healthy.
Giving Yourself an Insulin Shot for Diabetes For those with diabetes, an insulin shot delivers medicine into the subcutaneous tissue.
Giving Yourself an Insulin Shot for Diabetes
For those with diabetes, an insulin shot delivers medicine into the subcutaneous tissue.
What to Eat When You Have Type 1 Diabetes It s important to eat a healthy diet when you have type 1 diabetes. That doesn t mean you can t enjoy tasty food.
What to Eat When You Have Type 1 Diabetes
It s important to eat a healthy diet when you have type 1 diabetes. That doesn t mean you can t enjoy tasty food.
What Causes Gestational Diabetes? Gestational diabetes is high blood sugar that you get only when you re pregnant.
Gestational diabetes is high blood sugar that you get only when you re pregnant.
Gestational Diabetes: Can I Lower My Risk? Although some things mean you re more likely to get gestational diabetes, you can steps to lower your risk.
Gestational Diabetes: Can I Lower My Risk?
Although some things mean you re more likely to get gestational diabetes, you can steps to lower your risk.
Pregnancy and Gestational Diabetes Screening All pregnant women should be screened for gestational diabetes during their pregnancy.
Pregnancy and Gestational Diabetes Screening
All pregnant women should be screened for gestational diabetes during their pregnancy.
How Is Gestational Diabetes Treated? If you have gestational diabetes, you ll need to get your blood sugar under control to protect your health and your baby s.
If you have gestational diabetes, you ll need to get your blood sugar under control to protect your health and your baby s.
Questions for Your Doctor About Diabetic Macular Edema (DME) Whether you re newly diagnosed with diabetic macular edema or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Questions for Your Doctor About Diabetic Macular Edema (DME)
Whether you re newly diagnosed with diabetic macular edema or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Sign up for our free Diabetes Newsletter
A Visual Guide to Type 2 Diabetes WebMD offers a pictorial overview of the symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of type 2 diabetes.
WebMD offers a pictorial overview of the symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of type 2 diabetes.
How to Care for Your Heart With Diabetes Type 2 diabetes means youâ re much more prone to heart problems. Follow this advice to protect your ticker.
How to Care for Your Heart With Diabetes
Type 2 diabetes means youâ re much more prone to heart problems. Follow this advice to protect your ticker.
Diabetes and Your Mouth High blood sugar can cause damage throughout the body, including in your mouth. WebMD shows you why oral and dental care is key when you have diabetes.
High blood sugar can cause damage throughout the body, including in your mouth. WebMD shows you why oral and dental care is key when you have diabetes.
Diabetes and Eye Problems Learn what eye and vision problems are more likely when you have diabetes, what treatments are available, and what you can do to prevent them.
Learn what eye and vision problems are more likely when you have diabetes, what treatments are available, and what you can do to prevent them.
You can also search by physician, practice, or hospital name