What Is Psoriasis? PsoriasisÂ is a skin disorder that causes skin cells to multiply up to 10 times faster than normal.
PsoriasisÂ is a skin disorder that causes skin cells to multiply up to 10 times faster than normal.
7 Types of Psoriasis Knowing which kind ofÂ psoriasisÂ you have helps you and your doctor make a treatment plan. Most people have only one type at a time.
Knowing which kind ofÂ psoriasisÂ you have helps you and your doctor make a treatment plan. Most people have only one type at a time.
Is Psoriasis an Autoimmune Disease? Experts believe psoriasis is an autoimmune disease. It means your body thinks its own tissues are foreign invaders to be attacked.
Experts believe psoriasis is an autoimmune disease. It means your body thinks its own tissues are foreign invaders to be attacked.
How Does Psoriasis Progress? Psoriasis symptoms impact everyone differently. Mild psoriasis could stay the same, while someone elseâ s becomes more severe.
Psoriasis symptoms impact everyone differently. Mild psoriasis could stay the same, while someone elseâ s becomes more severe.
Tracking Your Psoriasis Outbreaks Tracking psoriasis flares can help you feel more in control of your condition.
Tracking psoriasis flares can help you feel more in control of your condition.
Prevent Psoriasis Flare-Ups With psoriasis, it s important to follow your doctorâ s advice. Still, you can help control and prevent flare-ups on your own.
With psoriasis, it s important to follow your doctorâ s advice. Still, you can help control and prevent flare-ups on your own.
Psoriasis: How to Stop the Spread When you look at your psoriasis patches, you want to know: How can I make them disappear? And how can I stop them from spreading?
When you look at your psoriasis patches, you want to know: How can I make them disappear? And how can I stop them from spreading?
Top Psoriasis Triggers While the cause of psoriasis stems from your body s immune system, certain triggers can make symptoms worse or cause flare-ups.
While the cause of psoriasis stems from your body s immune system, certain triggers can make symptoms worse or cause flare-ups.
Who Gets Psoriasis? Who gets psoriasis more often: women or men? And do your chances of developing it go up based on your race, ethnicity, or age?
Who gets psoriasis more often: women or men? And do your chances of developing it go up based on your race, ethnicity, or age?
Is Psoriasis Contagious? Psoriasis can look like aÂ rash, so you may worry that you could get it from someone else or pass it to others.
Psoriasis can look like aÂ rash, so you may worry that you could get it from someone else or pass it to others.
Your Genes and Psoriasis Youâ re more likely to get psoriasis if your blood relatives also have it. Thatâ s because certain genes play a role.
Youâ re more likely to get psoriasis if your blood relatives also have it. Thatâ s because certain genes play a role.
Cytokines in Psoriasis Your immune system uses tiny proteins called cytokines to communicate between cells. Some cytokines play a role in psoriasis.
Your immune system uses tiny proteins called cytokines to communicate between cells. Some cytokines play a role in psoriasis.
What Is Plaque Psoriasis? Psoriasis is a skin disease that affects about 8 million Americans. It comes in several forms. Plaque psoriasis is the most common.
Psoriasis is a skin disease that affects about 8 million Americans. It comes in several forms. Plaque psoriasis is the most common.
What Is Inverse Psoriasis? Inverse psoriasis is a skin condition that affects the folds of your skin.
Inverse psoriasis is a skin condition that affects the folds of your skin.
Deodorant for Underarm Psoriasis If you have psoriasis under your arms, aka inverse psoriasis, you might wonder if itâ s OK to use deodorant or antiperspirant.
If you have psoriasis under your arms, aka inverse psoriasis, you might wonder if itâ s OK to use deodorant or antiperspirant.
What Is Guttate Psoriasis? Guttate psoriasis is a type of psoriasis that shows up on your skin as red, scaly, small, teardrop-shaped spots.
Guttate psoriasis is a type of psoriasis that shows up on your skin as red, scaly, small, teardrop-shaped spots.
Scalp Psoriasis Scalp psoriasis is a common skin disorder. It can be a single patch or several, and can even affect your entire scalp.
Scalp psoriasis is a common skin disorder. It can be a single patch or several, and can even affect your entire scalp.
Scalp Psoriasis vs. Dandruff If your scalp itches and flakes, your doctor can tell if itâ s just dandruff or a more serious problem like psoriasis.
If your scalp itches and flakes, your doctor can tell if itâ s just dandruff or a more serious problem like psoriasis.
Psoriasis Shampoo: How to Choose If you have psoriasis on your scalp, you should find shampoos that are made specifically for your scalp.
If you have psoriasis on your scalp, you should find shampoos that are made specifically for your scalp.
Hair Care When You Have Psoriasis A visit to the salon can give your self-esteem a little boost. Donâ t let scalp psoriasis keep you from these simple pleasures.
A visit to the salon can give your self-esteem a little boost. Donâ t let scalp psoriasis keep you from these simple pleasures.
When to See a Doctor for Skin Problems Lots of things can set off your skin. Some people have conditions like psoriasis -- when skin cells pile up in thick patches.
Lots of things can set off your skin. Some people have conditions like psoriasis -- when skin cells pile up in thick patches.
Tests to Diagnose Psoriasis In most cases, your primary care doctor or dermatologist will be able to diagnose psoriasis by examining your skin.
In most cases, your primary care doctor or dermatologist will be able to diagnose psoriasis by examining your skin.
Do You Need a Skin Biopsy to Diagnose Psoriasis? Your doctor can usually tell if you have psoriasis without a biopsy. There are rare cases where you might need to get one.
Do You Need a Skin Biopsy to Diagnose Psoriasis?
Your doctor can usually tell if you have psoriasis without a biopsy. There are rare cases where you might need to get one.
Building Your Psoriasis Care Team To manage your psoriasis, youâ ll need ongoing care. You may need to see a dermatologist and other specialists.
To manage your psoriasis, youâ ll need ongoing care. You may need to see a dermatologist and other specialists.
Psoriasis Treatments: How To Get Rid of Psoriasis Thereâ s no cure for psoriasis. But treatment can help you feel better. You may need topical, oral, or systemic treatments.
Psoriasis Treatments: How To Get Rid of Psoriasis
Thereâ s no cure for psoriasis. But treatment can help you feel better. You may need topical, oral, or systemic treatments.
Treatment for Psoriatic Disease There are two main types of psoriatic disease: psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis. Living with either disease can be painful.
There are two main types of psoriatic disease: psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis. Living with either disease can be painful.
Choosing a Treatment for Psoriasis There isn t a cure for psoriasis, and there isn t a perfect treatment either.
There isn t a cure for psoriasis, and there isn t a perfect treatment either.
Solutions for Mild Psoriasis Mild to moderate psoriasis means that the red, scaly patches ( plaques ) cover less than 10% of your body.
Mild to moderate psoriasis means that the red, scaly patches ( plaques ) cover less than 10% of your body.
Tips to Care for Your Psoriasis There are some things most everyone can do to help keep psoriasis symptoms at bay and maintain your mental health.
There are some things most everyone can do to help keep psoriasis symptoms at bay and maintain your mental health.
7 Tips for Psoriasis Skin Care To boost your psoriasis treatment, some simple tweaks to your daily routine also can promote healing and calm flare-ups.
To boost your psoriasis treatment, some simple tweaks to your daily routine also can promote healing and calm flare-ups.
Skin Care Ingredients to Avoid You can use certain skin care products when youâ re living with psoriasis, but caution is the name of the game.
You can use certain skin care products when youâ re living with psoriasis, but caution is the name of the game.
Beauty Hacks for Psoriasis There are steps you can take to mask psoriasis problem areas. That can make you feel better about how you look.
There are steps you can take to mask psoriasis problem areas. That can make you feel better about how you look.
Psoriasis Complications Psoriasis complications go beyond the way skin may look. You may have other issues, like heart disease, kidney disease, joint problems, or depression.
Psoriasis complications go beyond the way skin may look. You may have other issues, like heart disease, kidney disease, joint problems, or depression.
How Psoriasis Can Affect Your Joints How does a skin condition like psoriasis affect your joints? It might not make sense at first, but here s the connection.
How does a skin condition like psoriasis affect your joints? It might not make sense at first, but here s the connection.
Link Between Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis Psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis are different diseases, but they are related. Some people may have both at the same time.
Link Between Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis
Psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis are different diseases, but they are related. Some people may have both at the same time.
Palmoplantar Pustulosis Palmoplantar pustulosis (PPP) causes blister-like sores on the palms of your hands and the soles of your feet.
Palmoplantar pustulosis (PPP) causes blister-like sores on the palms of your hands and the soles of your feet.
Appointment Prep Whether you re newly diagnosed with psoriasis or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.Â
Whether you re newly diagnosed with psoriasis or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.Â
Sign up for our free Psoriasis Newsletter
Life With GPP Alyssa Zuercher shares her experience living with generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP), a rare skin disease that causes painful flares and life-altering symptoms.
Alyssa Zuercher shares her experience living with generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP), a rare skin disease that causes painful flares and life-altering symptoms.
9 Ways to De-Stress When You Have Psoriasis Managing stress is especially important when you have psoriasis. Learn how to keep your stress under control.
9 Ways to De-Stress When You Have Psoriasis
Managing stress is especially important when you have psoriasis. Learn how to keep your stress under control.
9 Ways Psoriasis Differs for People of Color Find out what you need to know about different ways psoriasis differs for people of color.
9 Ways Psoriasis Differs for People of Color
Find out what you need to know about different ways psoriasis differs for people of color.
Best Bedding and Clothes for Psoriasis Which sheets, towels, clothing, and shoes are best for people with psoriasis? Learn more about how to protect your skin.
Which sheets, towels, clothing, and shoes are best for people with psoriasis? Learn more about how to protect your skin.
You can also search by physician, practice, or hospital name