What Is Heart Disease? You asked. We answer. Here s an easy-to-read, illustrated guide to heart disease.
You asked. We answer. Here s an easy-to-read, illustrated guide to heart disease.
Men and Heart Disease When you think of heart disease in men, usually people think of coronary artery disease and heart attack.
When you think of heart disease in men, usually people think of coronary artery disease and heart attack.
Women and Heart Disease Heart disease is the leading cause of death in women over 40 years old, especially after menopause.
Heart disease is the leading cause of death in women over 40 years old, especially after menopause.
What Causes Heart Disease? Most heart attacks are the end result of coronary heart disease, a condition that clogs coronary arteries with fatty, calcified plaques.
Most heart attacks are the end result of coronary heart disease, a condition that clogs coronary arteries with fatty, calcified plaques.
Heart Disease Warning Signs Here s a fast, easy-to-understand guide to the symptoms of each type of heart disease.
Here s a fast, easy-to-understand guide to the symptoms of each type of heart disease.
Enlarged Heart (Cardiomegaly) An enlarged heart (cardiomegaly) can have various causes. But it s usually caused by hypertension or coronary artery disease.
An enlarged heart (cardiomegaly) can have various causes. But it s usually caused by hypertension or coronary artery disease.
Irregular Heart Rhythm Irregular heart rhythm -- arrhythmia -- is when your heart doesn t keep up a good beat. Learn what it means here.
Irregular heart rhythm -- arrhythmia -- is when your heart doesn t keep up a good beat. Learn what it means here.
Heart Valve Disease You may not know what a heart valve is -- until it stops working right. It s a common form of heart disease.
You may not know what a heart valve is -- until it stops working right. It s a common form of heart disease.
Echocardiogram There are several variations on the echocardiogram, or echo. Learn about these ultrasound-like tests of the heart.
There are several variations on the echocardiogram, or echo. Learn about these ultrasound-like tests of the heart.
Chest X-Ray Why get a chest X-ray? What happens? Click here for quick answers.
Why get a chest X-ray? What happens? Click here for quick answers.
Stress Test Does your heart respond well to exertion? That s what a stress test looks for. Here s a straightforward description.
Does your heart respond well to exertion? That s what a stress test looks for. Here s a straightforward description.
Tilt Table Test The head-up tilt table test is used to help find the cause of fainting spells. Here s what you need to know.
The head-up tilt table test is used to help find the cause of fainting spells. Here s what you need to know.
Stents Get information about why theyâ re used and what types are available.
Get information about why theyâ re used and what types are available.
Heart Bypass Surgery If you need to have bypass surgery, youâ ll have lots of questions about how it works and how it can help.
If you need to have bypass surgery, youâ ll have lots of questions about how it works and how it can help.
Valve Disease Treatment When your heart valve disease needs attention, it can be treated by traditional surgery or by balloon valvuloplasty.
When your heart valve disease needs attention, it can be treated by traditional surgery or by balloon valvuloplasty.
Pacemakers A pacemaker is a small device that sends electrical impulses to the heart muscle to keep up a suitable heart rate and rhythm.
A pacemaker is a small device that sends electrical impulses to the heart muscle to keep up a suitable heart rate and rhythm.
After a Heart Attack Here are steps you can take after a heart attack to ensure a full recovery.
Here are steps you can take after a heart attack to ensure a full recovery.
Cardiac Rehab It s very likely your doctor will encourage you to get involved in a cardiac rehab program.
It s very likely your doctor will encourage you to get involved in a cardiac rehab program.
Heart-Healthy Cooking Got heart disease? Nothing is more important than eating heart-friendly foods. See what heart-healthy cooking is all about.
Got heart disease? Nothing is more important than eating heart-friendly foods. See what heart-healthy cooking is all about.
Safe Exercises for Heart Disease What exercises are best for those diagnosed with heart disease? Read more.
What exercises are best for those diagnosed with heart disease? Read more.
Questions for Your Doctor About ATTR-CM Whether you re newly diagnosed with transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy (ATTR-CM) or already treating it, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.Â
Whether you re newly diagnosed with transthyretin amyloid cardiomyopathy (ATTR-CM) or already treating it, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.Â
Questions for Your Doctor About HCM Whether you re newly diagnosed with HCM or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Whether you re newly diagnosed with HCM or already in treatment, learn how to make the most of your doctor appointment.
Sign up for our free Heart Health Newsletter
My Diagnosis Story: Recurrent Pericarditis Recurrent pericarditis patient story. Learn symptoms diagnosis, treatment with rilonacept, relapse, and what living with chronic heart inflammation feels like.
My Diagnosis Story: Recurrent Pericarditis
Recurrent pericarditis patient story. Learn symptoms diagnosis, treatment with rilonacept, relapse, and what living with chronic heart inflammation feels like.
Expert Q A: A Clinicianâ s Experience With Recurrent Pericarditis Expert Q A on recurrent pericarditis: causes, symptoms, IL-1 treatments, and how to manage flares and recovery.
Expert Q A: A Clinicianâ s Experience With Recurrent Pericarditis
Expert Q A on recurrent pericarditis: causes, symptoms, IL-1 treatments, and how to manage flares and recovery.
Hope on the Horizon: Ongoing Research in Pericarditis Pericarditis research is evolving. Learn about new treatments, IL-1 inhibitors, clinical trials, and whatâ s next for recurrent pericarditis care.
Hope on the Horizon: Ongoing Research in Pericarditis
Pericarditis research is evolving. Learn about new treatments, IL-1 inhibitors, clinical trials, and whatâ s next for recurrent pericarditis care.
Have Heart Disease? Take This Lifestyle Advice Simple lifestyle changes like eating (a little bit of) chocolate can boost your heart health. Learn more from this WebMD slideshow.
Have Heart Disease? Take This Lifestyle Advice
Simple lifestyle changes like eating (a little bit of) chocolate can boost your heart health. Learn more from this WebMD slideshow.
You can also search by physician, practice, or hospital name