You might not be familiar with the name, but you probably know the taste. Capsaicin is the stuff in chili peppers that makes your mouth feel hot. But it s also got a medical purpose. It s a key ingredient in creams and patches that can give you relief from pain .
When you put capsaicin on your skin , you help block pain messages to your nerves. Studies show capsaicin creams and patches can help relieve pain that s due to:
Joint conditions like rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis
Some research suggests it may help improve scaling, inflammation , redness, and pain from psoriasis . It may also help relieve pain from nerve damage that s due to:
Capsaicin cream. For most types of pain relief, your doctor may suggest you try capsaicin cream, lotion, ointment, gel, stick, film, or ointment. You usually don t need a prescription.
To treat headaches, you ll dab a bit inside your nostrils. Otherwise you ll rub it thoroughly onto your skin in the area where you hurt, several times a day. Wash your hands before and after you use it, and keep it away from your eyes and mouth .
Capsaicin patches. They have higher levels of capsaicin than creams. Your doctor may suggest it for postherpetic neuralgia or other long-term conditions like diabetic neuropathy .
You can only get the capsaicin patch at a doctor s office. They ll numb the area before applying it. Expect the process to take around 2 hours.
The capsaicin patch may help relieve pain for up to 3 months. Avoid touching the patch while it s on your skin.
Both creams and patches can irritate your skin and cause problems like:
This sometimes gets worse in hot and humid weather, when you bathe in warm water , and when you sweat. It usually lasts for just a few days but can continue for 2 to 4 weeks.
Capsaicin can also make your skin more sensitive to the sun and heat, so use sunscreen every time you head outdoors.
Like any drug, it can cause an allergic reaction in some people. Call you doctor if you get itching, hives , swelling in your throat, chest tightness, and trouble breathing
The patch can also cause rare side effects that affect your heart , including a slow or fast heart rate and a change in blood pressure . Let your doctor know if you have a history of heart or blood vessel problems or high blood pressure .