Skin Infections Bacterial Skin Infections Fungal Skin Infections Viral Skin Infections
Molluscum contagiosum is a common viral skin infection . It most often affects children, but adults with weakened immune systems can get it, too.
What Does Moscullum Contagiosum Look Like?
Molluscum contagiosum causes either single or multiple raised, pearl-like bumps (papules) on the skin . Itâ s an ongoing infection, so the bumps may last a few months or a few years. But most cases get better in 6 to 9 months.
Molluscum contagiosum papules commonly appear on the face, torso, and limbs of children and on the genitals, abdomen , and inner thighs of adults.Â
The condition usually causes bumps that:
Are small (2 to 5 millimeters in diameter)
Are firm, dome-shaped, and flesh-colored at first
Have a central core of white, waxy material
The condition has a few different stages. You ll start to notice bumps on your skin around 2 to 8 weeks after getting the virus that causes the infection. As they grow, the bumps will look dome-shaped and form an indent in the middle. During the final stage of the infection, the bumps will turn red and look like pimples. This means you can expect them to heal soon.
Molluscum contagiosum usually disappears on its own over a period of months to years if you have a healthy immune system . If you have AIDS or other conditions that affect the immune system , molluscum contagiosum can lead to widespread, chronic sores.
The molluscum contagiosum virus causes molluscum contagiosum. Itâ s part of the pox virus family. You can spread molluscum contagiosum:
Through direct contact with an infected person
By having sexual contact with an infected person
Doctors base a diagnosis of molluscum contagiosum on the way the papule looks. If your doctor isnâ t sure, they can confirm the diagnosis with a skin biopsy . Theyâ ll remove a piece of skin to look at more closely. If theyâ re worried you might have other health problems, they can check for them, too.
Because molluscum contagiosum can go away on its own, you may not need treatment. But your doctor can remove individual bumps by scraping or freezing them. This procedure could leave a scar.
Topical medications (medications you put on your skin), like those used to remove warts , can also help remove the papules.
Here are some home remedies that you can use to ease the symptoms of molluscum contagiosum:
Apple cider vinegar. Apply it daily to unbroken bumps with a cotton ball or pad, and cover the cotton with a bandage. Another option is an apple cider vinegar bath. Pour one cup into your bathwater and soak for 10 minutes.
Tea tree oil. This type of oil with added iodine may work well to treat molluscum contagiosum lesions in young children.
Imiquimod cream. This cream helps your immune system clear the bumps. Treatment usually takes about 16 weeks. Doctors don t suggest the cream for kids since it may not work for them.
Salicylic acid. Commonly used for warts, this may also work for molluscum contagiosum.
Sinecatechins (green tea). Made from green tea, this treatment is FDA-approved for genital and anal warts and may also help treat molluscum contagiosum in those areas.
Tretinoin. You ll need to apply this cream carefully; your dermatologist can show you how to use it properly. The aim is to irritate the skin s surface to help your immune system fight the virus.
Due to possible skin irritation, you should only use treatments such as imiquimod, salicylic acid, and tretinoin under the care of a dermatologist. Your dermatologist will advise you on the proper concentration and how often to use them. While home remedies might offer some relief, they should not replace professional medical advice and treatment.
To avoid molluscum contagiosum, follow these tips:
Avoid direct skin-to-skin contact with anyone who may have the condition.
Either donâ t have sex or have a monogamous sexual relationship with someone who isnâ t infected. (Male and female condoms donâ t offer full protection. The virus can get to areas the condom doesnâ t cover.)
Molluscum contagiosum is a common viral skin infection, mostly affecting children, though adults with weak immune systems can get it too. It causes small, raised bumps on the skin, which can appear alone or in clusters. The bumps may last for months or even years but usually clear up in 6 to 9 months. Molluscum contagiosum often clears up without treatment. But, doctors can remove the bumps by scraping or freezing them, though this can leave scars. Topical treatments, like those used for warts, can also help.
If you get the virus through sexual contact, doctors consider it a sexually transmitted infection (STI). Bumps will form on the genitals and sometimes inside of the mouth.