Causes, Risks Prevention Causes Risks Screening Prevention
Treatment Side Effects Overview of Treatment Chemotherapy Chemo Side Effects Radiation Immunotherapy Cutting-Edge Treatments Complementary Alternative Medicine
Living With Daily Life Diet Exercise Pain, Fatigue Mental Health
Appointment Prep Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia Polycythemia Vera Myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDS) Myelofibrosis Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML)
A Wilms tumor (also called a nephroblastoma) is the most commonÂ kidney cancer Â in children. Most children with it have a tumor on oneÂ kidney , but about 5% get a tumor on both.
The reasons arenâ t clear, but it most often affects kids who are 3 to 4 years old. Itâ s much less common after age 5. Doctors are getting better at spotting and treating this type ofÂ cancer , so many children who have it will make a full recovery.
Some children who have a Wilms tumor wonâ t notice symptoms. Others may have:
A growth that you can see or feel in their belly
Many Wilms tumors get very big before anyone notices them. Theyâ re sometimes the only sign of the disease. The average size is 1 pound.
AllÂ cancersÂ happen when cells in your body start to grow out of control. If your child has a Wilms tumor, theirÂ kidney Â cells didnâ t grow like they should have. Instead, they turned intoÂ cancer Â cells. Most of the time, this is because of a random change in a gene. Rarely, itâ s because of gene changes handed down from a parent.
Things that might make a child more likely to have a Wilms tumor include:
Age. Â Most children who get this type of cancer are between 3 and 5 years old.
Gender. Â Girls are more likely to have it than boys.
Race. Â Black children are slightly more likely to get a Wilms tumor than children of other races.
Family history . Â If someone in your family has had a Wilms tumor, the odds are higher that your child will get it, too.
Testicles that havenâ t dropped (cryptorchidism)
The opening of theÂ penis Â is on the underside instead of on the tip (hypospadias)
A total or partial lack of the colored area of the eye (aniridia)
An oversized arm or leg (hemihyphertrophy)
Another health condition. Â A Wilms tumor sometimes happens in children who have other rare conditions:
WAGR syndrome Â causes problems in the urinary tract.
Boys with Denys- Drash syndrome Â have testicles but also have female traits.
Microcephaly is when a baby is born with an unusually small head.
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome causes internal organs that are larger than usual.
There are two kinds of Wilms tumors, divided by how the cells look under a microscope.
Favorable histology. Â More than 9 out of 10 Wilms tumors fall into this group. It means there isnâ t a lot of difference among the cancer cells. Children with this type have a good chance of being cured.
Unfavorable or anaplastic histology. Â This type has a variety of deformed cancer cells. It can be much harder to cure.
Your childâ s medical appointment will probably include:
A physical exam and medical history. Your doctor will ask about the symptoms and whether cancer or urinary tract problems run in your family.
A blood test to check how well your child s kidneys and liver are working, their red and white blood cells, and their blood clotting.
Imaging tests like an ultrasound, MRI, or CT scan of your childâ sÂ belly
If the doctor finds a tumor in your childâ s kidney, they may:
Take a small sample to look at under a microscope (biopsy)
Order more imaging tests to find out whether the disease has spread
Do a bone scan to look for diseased bone
Your doctor will use test results to figure out how far a tumor has spread. This is called staging. The stages of a Wilms tumor are:
Stage I. Itâ s in only one kidney. Surgery can remove it all.
Stage II. Cancer has moved into the area around the kidney, but surgery can remove it all.
Stage III. Cancer hasnâ t spread outside the childâ s abdomen. Surgery canâ t remove it all.
Stage IV. Cancer has spread to parts of the body that are farther away, like the lungs, bones, or brain, or to lymph nodes outside the belly.
Stage V. There are tumors in both kidneys.
How a Wilms tumor is treated depends on how much the cancer has spread. It can include surgery,Â chemotherapy , andÂ radiation therapy .
If your doctor operates, they may do one of these procedures:
Partial nephrectomy. This removes the tumor and some healthy tissue around it.
Radical nephrectomy. This removes the affected kidney, the ureter (the tube that carries pee away from the kidney), the adrenal gland on top of the kidney, and nearby tissue.
Removal of both kidneys. In some cases, the doctor will need to take out both kidneys. Your child would then need to have dialysis, using a machine to filter waste out of their blood. Once theyâ re healthy enough, they might have a kidney transplant.
Certain medications can fight or kill cancer cells inside your childâ s body. Most children who have Wilms tumors will get chemo at some point during treatment. These drugs can also affect healthy cells, leading to side effects including:
Your medical team will often be able to manage side effects.
Strong radiation can also kill cancer cells. A machine focuses it onto the cancer.
Doctors tend to use radiation for tumors that are stage III and above. But it can also have short-term and long-term side effects, including tissue damage, so theyâ ll use as little as possible.
The outlook for most kids with a Wilms tumor is good. Up to 90% of children who have a tumor with favorable histology can be cured. If the tumor has unfavorable histology, the cure rate is lower.
Once cancer treatment ends, your child will have regular doctor visits to make sure they stay healthy.
If thereâ s something you donâ t understand, make sure to ask your doctor. This will help you know how to best to support your child.