What Is High Blood Pressure? Learn about the basics of blood pressure and high blood pressure: an overview of risk factors, causes, diagnosis, and treatment.
Learn about the basics of blood pressure and high blood pressure: an overview of risk factors, causes, diagnosis, and treatment.
Systolic and Diastolic Pressure Find out what the top and the bottom blood pressure numbers mean, and make sure your numbers are on target.
Find out what the top and the bottom blood pressure numbers mean, and make sure your numbers are on target.
High Blood Pressure in Black People High blood pressure, also called hypertension, affects Black people in unique ways. Why is hypertension so common in Black people?
High blood pressure, also called hypertension, affects Black people in unique ways. Why is hypertension so common in Black people?
Causes of High Blood Pressure Discover what causes high blood pressure. Start today to change the risk factors you can control.
Discover what causes high blood pressure. Start today to change the risk factors you can control.
Are There High Blood Pressure Warning Signs? Nearly one-third of people with high blood pressure don t know it. Thatâ s because it doesnâ t have symptoms unless itâ s severe.
Are There High Blood Pressure Warning Signs?
Nearly one-third of people with high blood pressure don t know it. Thatâ s because it doesnâ t have symptoms unless itâ s severe.
What Is Secondary Hypertension? In some people, high blood pressure is caused by another disease. Find out whether you may have secondary hypertension.
In some people, high blood pressure is caused by another disease. Find out whether you may have secondary hypertension.
High Blood Pressure and Atherosclerosis Coronary artery disease is one of the most serious health problems related to untreated high blood pressure and atherosclerosis.
Coronary artery disease is one of the most serious health problems related to untreated high blood pressure and atherosclerosis.
Stroke and Hypertension A stroke occurs when blood flow to an area in the brain is cut off. People with hypertension are more likely to have a stroke.
A stroke occurs when blood flow to an area in the brain is cut off. People with hypertension are more likely to have a stroke.
Tests for High Blood Pressure The only way to tell whether you have hypertensionÂ is to have itÂ measured with a blood pressure cuff (sphygmomanometer).
The only way to tell whether you have hypertensionÂ is to have itÂ measured with a blood pressure cuff (sphygmomanometer).
High Blood Pressure: What Your Doctor Looks For In addition to measuring your blood pressure, your doctor will ask for your medical and family disease history, and assess risks.
High Blood Pressure: What Your Doctor Looks For
In addition to measuring your blood pressure, your doctor will ask for your medical and family disease history, and assess risks.
Hypertension Treatment Treatment for hypertension comes in many forms, from lifestyle changes to medication.
Treatment for hypertension comes in many forms, from lifestyle changes to medication.
High Blood Pressure Drugs Doctors have hundreds of different hypertension drugs to choose from. These drugs work in many ways to lower blood pressure.
Doctors have hundreds of different hypertension drugs to choose from. These drugs work in many ways to lower blood pressure.
High Blood Pressure Medication Guidelines If your doctor has prescribed medication to lower your blood pressure, here are things to keep in mind about your treatment.
High Blood Pressure Medication Guidelines
If your doctor has prescribed medication to lower your blood pressure, here are things to keep in mind about your treatment.
Calcium Channel Blockers Calcium channel blockers are drugs used to lower blood pressure.
Calcium channel blockers are drugs used to lower blood pressure.
DASH Diet Here are several handy tips on how to incorporate the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet into your daily life.
Here are several handy tips on how to incorporate the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet into your daily life.
Diet for High Blood Pressure By starting new food habits, you may be able to lower yourÂ blood pressureÂ and reduce yourÂ medsÂ that control high blood pressure.
By starting new food habits, you may be able to lower yourÂ blood pressureÂ and reduce yourÂ medsÂ that control high blood pressure.
Grapefruit Juice Effects on Medication More than 50 medicines are affected by grapefruit juice -- including those for high blood pressure. Is yours on the list?
More than 50 medicines are affected by grapefruit juice -- including those for high blood pressure. Is yours on the list?
10 Questions About Hypertension What causes hypertension? What is a normal blood pressure? How is hypertension treated? Get answers to these and other questions.
What causes hypertension? What is a normal blood pressure? How is hypertension treated? Get answers to these and other questions.
Related Website: American Heart Association This American Heart Association shares what you can do about hypertension and how you can decide on treatment.
Related Website: American Heart Association
This American Heart Association shares what you can do about hypertension and how you can decide on treatment.
Related Website: TeensHealth: Understanding Blood Pressure Even kids can have high blood pressure. TeensHealth aims to teach kids what hypertension is, its causes, and how to prevent it.
Related Website: TeensHealth: Understanding Blood Pressure
Even kids can have high blood pressure. TeensHealth aims to teach kids what hypertension is, its causes, and how to prevent it.
Sign up for our free Hypertension Newsletter
Tips to Lower Your Blood Pressure Medication can help lower your blood pressure, but you ll need to make some changes to your lifestyle, too. Learn some easy ways to make improvements.
Medication can help lower your blood pressure, but you ll need to make some changes to your lifestyle, too. Learn some easy ways to make improvements.
Health Check: Blood Pressure Did you know that high blood pressure usually has no symptoms? Thatâ s why itâ s important to get your numbers checked regularly. Hereâ s what they mean.
Did you know that high blood pressure usually has no symptoms? Thatâ s why itâ s important to get your numbers checked regularly. Hereâ s what they mean.
Worst Foods for High Blood Pressure Diagnosed with high blood pressure or trying to avoid it? Stay away from these foods.
Diagnosed with high blood pressure or trying to avoid it? Stay away from these foods.
Exercise Tips for Lowering Blood Pressure Exercise, along with other lifestyle changes and medication, is important to prevent problems with high blood pressure. While starting a fitness routine may seem like a daunting task, it doesnâ t have to be. Get easy ideas at WebMD.
Exercise Tips for Lowering Blood Pressure
Exercise, along with other lifestyle changes and medication, is important to prevent problems with high blood pressure. While starting a fitness routine may seem like a daunting task, it doesnâ t have to be. Get easy ideas at WebMD.
You can also search by physician, practice, or hospital name