Neurofibromatosis (NF) is a group of genetic conditions that cause the growth of tumors that affect the nervous system. These tumors occur along the nerves anywhere in the body. It s not a type of cancer, but sometimes the tumors in NF can become cancerous. About 1 in 2,000 babies are born with NF. Four million people have been diagnosed with it around the world. Â
Symptoms of neurofibromatosis can vary from person to person, depending on the type, and they may worsen over time. Your doctor can help manage your or your child s symptoms and try to prevent complications. Although there s no cure for neurofibromatosis, lifelong care options â which can include medications, targeted therapies, surgery, speech or physical therapy, devices to help you hear and see better, and mental health support â may help to manage symptoms and shrink tumors.
The three types of neurofibromatosis are:
This used to be called Recklinghausen s disease. It s the most common type of NF. About 1 in every 2,500 babies are born with it, but symptoms tend to develop slowly, so NF1 often isn t spotted until early childhood.
Cafe-au-lait spots.Â If you have NF1, you may develop these light brown patches on your skin. They can be harder to see if your skin is brown or darker.
Neurofibromas. These pea-sized tumors on or under your skin can be painful.
Optic gliomas. Between 15% and 20% of children with NF1 develop a tumor on their optic nerve. This can harm your eyesight.
Learning difficulties. About half of all children who live with NF1 have trouble learning in school.Â
This type used to be called neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2). If you have it, tumors can grow on your vestibular nerve, which sends messages from your inner ear to your brain. Experts call these vestibular schwannomas. They can cause:
You could also get tumors in other parts of your body.
You might not notice NF2-SWN symptoms until your teens or 20s. If you have a mild form, you might not get diagnosed until much later in life.Â
NF2â SWN is less common than NF1. Only about 1 in 25,000 babies are born with it.
This is the least common type of NF. It affects about 1 in 70,000 people.
SWN causes tumors (schwannomas) to grow on your brain, spine, or nerves. These tumors aren t cancerous, but they can damage your hearing, vision, organs, blood vessels, or other parts of your body. You could have one or two, or you could have many tumors.
Chronic pain is the most common symptom.Â
SWN is often diagnosed in adults, but people of all ages can have it.
Neurofibromatosis is often inherited (passed down by family members through your genes). But about 50% of people diagnosed with the disorder have no family history. That s because it can result from a sudden mutation (change) in your genes. Once this change takes place, you can pass it on to future generations.Â
The NF1 gene makes a protein called neurofibromin that controls your cells growth. A mutation of this gene that causes loss of its function leads to the development of cells around the nerve sheath to grow out of control.
The NF2 gene makes a protein called merlin, which prevents tumors from growing. Changes to this gene cause a loss of merlin and uncontrolled cell growth.
Changes on two known genes, SMARCB1 and LZTR1, are linked to schwannomatosis. Both also suppress tumors.
Your symptoms will depend on the type of NF that you have.
Freckling in your armpits or groin, which often appears between ages 3 and 5
Lisch nodules (tiny bumps on the colored part of your eye)
Bone problems, like a curved spine (scoliosis) or bowed legs
Learning and behavior differences, including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Aside from trouble hearing, ringing in the ears, and balance issues, you could have symptoms from tumors that form in other areas of your body. For instance, you may notice:
Facial paralysis (not being able to move part of your face)
Skin changes, like growths or changes in skin color
With this kind of NF, it s common to have:
Intense pain that won t go away (may be anywhere in your body.)
If your doctor thinks you or your child has NF, they ll ask many questions about health, symptoms, and family history. They ll do a physical exam and look closely at the skin, eyes, and vision. They ll also check hearing.
In some cases, your doctor may order more tests. These could include:
Imaging tests, like X-rays, computerized tomography (CT) scans, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to look for tumors or bone changes
Genetic testing, to confirm a diagnosis or help make a diagnosis if symptoms are unclearÂ
To receive a diagnosis of NF1, you must have at least two of the following features:
Two or more neurofibromas or one or more plexiform neurofibromas (a nerve that has become thick and misshapen due to the abnormal growth of cells that cover it)
A gene variant associated with NF1 on genetic testing
To be diagnosed with NF2, you must have one of the following:
Tumors on the hearing nerves of both earsÂ
The same gene changes in two separate NF2-related tumors
Two major criteria or two minor and one major criteria from the following lists:
First-degree relative other than a sibling with NF2-related schwannomatosis
Two or more meningiomas (tumors in the membranes that cover your brain and spinal cord)
Sign of NF2 in unaffected tissue, like your blood
Ependymoma (tumor in a tissue of your central nervous system)
Your doctor could diagnose you with schwannomatosis if you re 30 or older and have:
Two schwannoma tumors somewhere other than your skin, and one was confirmed by biopsy (tissue sample)
No known NF2 gene mutation or relative with NF2-SWN or one schwannoma confirmed by biopsy and a close family member who meets the criteria for schwannomatosis
NF is a rare condition. To get the best care, it s important that you or your child sees a doctor who s familiar with it.Â
The NF Clinic Network (NFCN)Â can help you find clinics in the U.S. and Canada that have a lot of experience with, or specialize in, caring for people with all types of NF.
The NF Collective also can help you find a doctor near you.
If you can t find a doctor near your home, you can print out fact sheets about NF from a trusted organization like the Children s Tumor Foundation and share them with your primary care doctor.
There s no cure for neurofibromatosis yet, and there s no one-size-fits-all treatment. Many symptoms, like dark spots, may not need treatment at all.
If you do have symptoms that need to be managed, your doctor may prescribe medication. For instance, some targeted drugs can stop certain types of tumors from growing, reduce chronic pain, prevent seizures, or manage your headaches.Â
MEK inhibitors are a type of targeted drug. They re usually used to treat skin cancer but have been shown to help shrink some NF tumors.Â
MEK is part of a pathway that signals tumors to grow. When you have NF, this pathway is more active than it needs to be. MEK inhibitors act as a roadblock.
This type of medication doesn t work right away. You ll need to take it for a few months before you see a difference.
Two MEK inhibitors are FDA-approved for NF:
Selumetinib (Koselugo), can help slow the growth of tumors caused by neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) called plexiform neurofibromas (PN) that have symptoms and can t be removed with surgery. The medicine blocks two overactive enzymes (MEK1 and MEK2) in NF1 to reduce neurofibroma numbers, growth, and tumor size. Koselugo was first approved for children 1 year old and younger, but it s now approved for adults --- so people can now continue treatment and stay on their long-term treatment plan.Â
Mirdametinib (Gomekli), which can also help treat some types of NF1. You take it by mouth for 21 days, are off it for a week, then start taking it again. Your doctor will prescribe a certain number of cycles like this.Â
Other MEK inhibitors are also being studied. These include:
Binimetinib, which is being tested on children older than 1 year as well as adults who have some types of NF1Â
Trametinib, which could help with some severe cases of NF1
Another drug â cabozantinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor â is also being tested. So far, clinical trials show that it may reduce tumors and decrease pain in people with NF1.
Chemotherapy or Â radiation therapy, if a tumor has turned cancerous
Surgery for bone problems, like scoliosis
Therapy (including physical therapy, counseling, or support groups)
You might benefit from joining a clinical trial. These are studies that help researchers find and test new treatments for neurofibromatosis.Â
The National Institutes of Health has information about Â joining a clinical trial. They also maintain Â a searchable database of clinical trials.Â
The complications you may have over time depend on the type of NF you live with.
Hearing and vision. Tumors can affect how well you can hear or see.
Nervous system. For instance, you might have trouble learning well and thinking clearly. Although it s less common, you could also have seizures.
Bones. You could have bones that are easily broken or need surgery to correct a curved spine.Â
Heart.Â You re more likely to have high blood pressure, which can damage your blood vessels.
Mental health . Sometimes, tumors and spots caused by NF can make you self-conscious, anxious, or depressed.
People with NF1 are also more likely to have some types of cancer.Â
NF2-related schwannomatosis complications
If you live with this type of NF, you could have:
Brain or spinal tumors that need surgery to remove
The most common complication of schwannomatosis is severe, ongoing pain. In some cases, it could make it hard for you to get through your day.
You may feel overwhelmed when you or your child gets an NF diagnosis. It can help to:
Learn more about NF . It could help give you a sense of control and let you know how to better manage specific symptoms.Â
See your doctors regularly. Specialists you might need to see include:Â
At some medical centers, a nurse coordinator or family nurse practitioner can help you manage your appointments with different doctors.Â
Find different ways to deal with your symptoms. Talk to your doctor about ways to do this. For instance:Â
Physical therapy and occupational therapy can help you manage issues with balance.Â
If you have hearing loss, you could learn sign language or try hearing aids or implants.Â
A speech therapist can help you improve your speech and ability to swallow.
Acupuncture may help you deal with ongoing pain.
Counseling, massage therapy, and yoga can help reduce your stress.
How Your Condition Might Change Over Time
If you have NF1, there s no way to predict how your symptoms may change over time. Even if you have a parent with NF1, you could still have a different experience than them.
If NF2-SWN was passed down to you, your symptoms could be a lot like those of the parent who also had it. Sometimes, doctors can also look at the genetic change that caused NF2-SWN and generally predict your outlook.
Schwannomatosis is more complex. There s no way yet for doctors to predict the path that the condition could take in the future.
NF organizations can offer a variety of free services, including:
Financial aid, like help with travel expenses to get medical care
Support groups and other ways to connect to people living with NF
Some groups you could connect with include:
The NF Registry is a database of people with living NF around the world. Signing up allows you to get involved with NF research and get matched with clinical trials.
Depression, anxiety, stress, and low self-esteem are common when you live with NF. Don t forget to take care of your mental health along with tending to your physical symptoms.Â
Working with a mental health expert, like a counselor, can help. Research shows that your quality of life could be improved by:
Mindfulness strategies, like deep breathing and meditation
Coping strategies, like being more aware of your stress and setting goals to help yourself
Optimism, or expecting a positive outcome, through the use of things like humor and visual imagery
You may also find it helpful to join a support group and meet others who live with NF.Â
If you care for a child with neurofibromatosis:
Talk to them about their condition.Â Choose words that are right for their age and maturity. To get started:
Plan what you ll say. You may want to rehearse in front of someone you trust.
Keep an open mind. Your child s reaction may not be what you expect.
It s OK to not have all the answers. This isn t a one and done conversation, but something you and your child can keep talking about.
Support your child at school. About Â 50% to 60% of children with NF1 have learning differences. Your child may need special support in school, which you can ask for in an individualized education program (IEP).
Cognitive (thinking) skills usually don t worsen over time. But as your child gets older, you may be faced with different challenges. When you need more support, ask your doctor to help connect you with resources, like an adult literacy network.
Accept help. You don t need to power through by yourself. Allow others to help out with small errands, house chores, or child care.
Neurofibromatosis is a group of genetic conditions that affect your skin, nerves, brain, and spinal cord. There s no cure yet, but doctors keep looking for new and better ways to treat NF symptoms. Medications, surgery, physical therapy, and occupational therapy can all help you manage the condition. Reaching out to NF organizations or joining a support group can be helpful, too.
What s the life expectancy of people with neurofibromatosis?
If you only have a few complications, your life expectancy with NF is about the same as someone who doesn t have this condition.
Can one type of neurofibromatosis change into another?
No, the types of NF are all separate and don t change into each other.
How does neurofibromatosis affect a person s life?
It s really difficult to predict how NF will affect your life. Some people have very few symptoms, while others face more challenges. It s important to have a care team you trust and that has experience treating NF.Â
There isn t yet a way to prevent NF. If you want to start a family, talk to a genetic counselor about whether or not you could pass it on to your child.
If a tumor causes pain or weakness, your doctor may advise surgery to remove it. Surgery also may be the best course if a tumor is growing fast or if your doctor suspects it might develop into cancer.