Living With Understanding Blood Sugar Diet Exercise Better Living Complications
Type 2 Diabetes Overview Symptoms Causes Diagnosis Tests Prevention Treatment Living Managing Complications Related Diseases
Type 1 Diabetes Overview Treating Managing Complications Related Conditions
Prediabetes,Â or borderline diabetes, is when yourÂ blood sugarÂ level is higher than it should be but not high enough for your doctor to diagnose diabetes.Â
People with type 2 diabetes almost always have prediabetes first. But it doesnâ t usually cause symptoms. About 98 million people in the U.S. have prediabetes, but more than 80% donâ t know that they have it.
Prediabetes treatment can prevent more serious health problems, includingÂ type 2 diabetes Â and problems with yourÂ heart, blood vessels,Â eyes, andÂ kidneys.
Your doctor might also call this condition:
Most people don t have any signs of prediabetes. But you might notice that:
You have areas of darker skin in your armpit or on your neck.
You have small skin growths in the same areas.
Some early diabetes symptoms that could affect women (and those assigned female at birth) in particular are:
Vaginal dryness that can make sex uncomfortable
You get prediabetes because you have insulin resistance. That s when your body makes insulin (a hormone that helps regulate the levels of sugar in your bloodstream) but doesn t use it correctly. This causes your blood sugar levels to be higher than they should be.
Doctors aren t sure exactly why people develop insulin resistance. But things that can contribute to it include:
Some hormonal health conditions, such as Cushing s syndrome and hypothyroidism
Some medications, such as steroid drugs used over a long period
Youâ re more likely to get prediabetes if you:
Have a waist size larger than 40 inches if youâ re a man (or were assigned as male at birth) and 35 inches if youâ re a woman (or were assigned female at birth)
Donâ t eat enough fruit, veggies, nuts,Â whole grains, or olive oil
Are Black, Native American, Latino, or Pacific Islander
Have excess weightÂ orÂ obesity, especially if you tend to carry fat around your middle (belly fat)
HaveÂ high cholesterol, highÂ triglycerides, lowÂ HDL or good cholesterol, and highÂ LDL or bad cholesterol
HadÂ gestational diabetes Â or gave birth to aÂ babyÂ who weighed more than 9 pounds
HaveÂ polycystic ovary syndrome, a common condition that causes irregular periods and other symptoms
Have aÂ sleepÂ problem, such as sleep apnea
Work that involves changing shifts or night shifts
Get tested for prediabetes if those things apply to you and if you:
Have had an unusual blood sugar reading.
Show signs ofÂ insulinÂ resistance, which means your body makes insulin but doesn t respond to it the way it should. These include darkened areas of skin, trouble concentrating, and more fatigue or hunger than usual.
Why race and ethnicity matter in prediabetes
As with diabetes, prediabetes is more common in people of certain ethnic and racial groups. Native Americans and Alaska Natives have the highest rates of diabetes among populations in the U.S. An estimated 75,000 people in the Navajo Area alone are thought to have prediabetes.
According to the CDC, prediabetes affects about:
34.6% of Hispanic adults (though they re more likely to have been diagnosed with diabetes than Asian or white adults)
There are many reasons for the disparities, including family health history and differences in access to health care, healthy foods, and safe places to exercise.
The CDC says prediabetes affects men at a slightly higher rate (41%) than women (32%).
Some early studies indicated that gender-affirming hormone therapy might worsen insulin resistance and increase the risk of diabetes in transgender women. But follow-up studies showed conflicting results, so more research is needed into this.
Your doctor will do at least one of these tests:
You wonâ t eat for 8 hours, and then a technician will take your blood to test the sugar levels.
Normal range if your blood sugar is less than 100 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL)
Prediabetes range if your blood sugar is 100-125 mg/dL
Diabetes range if your blood sugar is 126 mg/dL or higher
First, you ll have a fasting plasma glucose test. Then, you ll drink something sugary. After 2 hours, a technician will take more blood for testing. The results indicate:
Normal range if your blood sugar is less than 140 mg/dL after the second test
Prediabetes range if your blood sugar is 140-199 mg/dL after the second test
Diabetes range if your blood sugar is 200 mg/dL or higher after the second test
This blood test shows your average blood sugar levels for the past 2-3 months. Doctors give it to people who have diabetes to see if their blood sugar levels are under control. They can also use it to diagnose prediabetes or diabetes. The results indicate:
You may need to take the test again to confirm the results.
Doctors diagnose prediabetes based on the same blood sugar levels, no matter the personâ s age. The American Diabetes Association says children aged 10 and older should be tested if they have extra weight or obesity along with:
A mother who had gestational diabetes while pregnant with the child
Native American, Black, Hispanic, Asian American, or Pacific Islander heritage
Signs of insulin resistance or conditions linked to it, such as low birth weight, high blood pressure, or polycystic ovary syndrome
If a child who has a high chance of getting prediabetes gets normal test results, the American Diabetes Association advises testing them again at least every 3 years.
Without treatment, prediabetes can become type 2 diabetes. That can lead to other serious problems, including:
Even before it becomes diabetes, untreated prediabetes could cause long-term damage to your blood vessels, kidneys and heart. It s been linked to so-called silent heart attacks, whose symptoms are so minor that you may not even notice them.
The main treatment for prediabetes is a healthy lifestyle that includes these steps:
Get yourÂ blood pressureÂ and cholesterol under control.
If you re at high risk of diabetes, your doctor might also suggest you takeÂ medicationÂ suchÂ as metforminÂ (Glucophage) to lower your blood sugar.
Thereâ s no official diet, but these five swaps can help reverse prediabetes and lower your chances of gettingÂ type 2 diabetes:
Choose whole grains and whole-grain products over processed carbs such as whiteÂ bread, potatoes, andÂ breakfastÂ cereals.
DrinkÂ coffee,Â water, andÂ teaÂ instead of soda and juice.
Choose good fats such as those in vegetable oil, nuts, and seeds over those in margarine, baked goods, and fried foods.
Trade red meat and processed meats for nuts, whole grains, poultry, andÂ fish.
Use olive oil instead of lard or butter.
If making big diet changes seems tough, start with little changes such as:
Roast or bake foods instead of deep-frying.
SomeÂ healthy eating plans that can lower your chances of diabetes include:
DASH (dietary approach to stopÂ hypertension )
If youâ re not sure how to plan your meals, ask your doctor. They can refer you to a registered dietitian nutritionist (RDN). Thatâ s a professional whoâ s trained to help you find healthy ways to eat. Most importantly, theyâ ll want to come up with a plan you can stick to.
When youÂ exercise, your body uses theÂ sugar in yourÂ blood to fuel yourÂ workout. Over time, regular physical activity can lower your overall glucose levels. Youâ ll also become more sensitive to the insulin in your body. That makes it easier for your muscles to tap into that glucose.
You should get at least 150 minutes per week of moderate exercise. Aim for 30 minutes a day, 5 days a week. You donâ t have to do anything too intense. You can:
You may want to add a couple of days of strength, or resistance, training. Thatâ s when you use weight machines, free weights, your own body, or exercise bands to build muscle.
If youâ re new to exercise, talk to your doctor about whatâ s safe for you.
Not everyone with prediabetes needs toÂ lose weight. But if youâ reÂ overweight, shedding 5%-10% of yourÂ body weight can lower your chances of diabetes by more than half.
You may wonder whether carrying extra weight or being obesity causes diabetes. Thatâ s something experts are still trying to figure out.Â What they do know is that extra bodyÂ fat, especially around your belly, sends out hormones that affect your appetite and causeÂ inflammation . The cells that help you use insulin may get hurt in the process. Some experts think losing belly fat may help you get better control of your blood sugar.
Studies showÂ sleep loss can make it harder to control your blood sugar and appetite. That may be why your chances ofÂ obesity andÂ type 2 diabetes go up if youÂ sleep less than 5-6 hours a night. Your chances are also higher if the quality of your sleep is bad.
If you have ongoing sleep problems, skip your afternoonÂ caffeine. Youâ ll also want to avoidÂ alcohol close to bedtime. Both can disrupt your slumber. If that doesnâ t help, talk to your doctor. They can help treat yourÂ insomnia .
Studies show people who smoke have a higher chance of prediabetes than nonsmokers. High levels of nicotine make it harder for your body to use insulin. CigaretteÂ smoking also damages your cells in a way that experts think leads to diabetes. Itâ s important to talk to your doctor about how to quit.
The same healthy lifestyle habits that treat prediabetes can help prevent it. Other things that can help:
Donâ t have more than one alcoholic drink a day.
Get regular checkups so your doctor can keep tabs on your blood sugar.
Take any blood sugar medications just as your doctor prescribes.
Unfortunately, prediabetes isn t always preventable. Some people whose genes put them at high risk for the condition may develop it even if they follow a healthy lifestyle. That s one reason it s important to keep up with your health care appointments.
When you have prediabetes, your blood sugar levels are higher than they should be but not high enough to be considered diabetes. People with prediabetes are at higher risk for type 2 diabetes and the other health problems that can come along with it. You may be able to reverse it by making healthy lifestyle changes and, in some cases, by taking medicine to control your blood sugar.
How often should I check my blood sugar for prediabetes?
If you re healthy, your doctor will probably test your blood sugar about every 3 years. If you already have prediabetes, they ll probably do it at least once a year. Because prediabetes doesn t usually cause symptoms, regular checkups are important, especially if you have a family history of diabetes or other risk factors.
Research shows that it s possible for those with prediabetes to get diabetic retinopathy, a condition that can lead to serious eye damage and sometimes blindness. If you have prediabetes, your doctor may recommend eye exams to check for retinopathy . Tell your doctor if you notice any changes in your vision.